The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Literary and Historical Atlas of Asia, by 
J. G. Bartholomew

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Literary and Historical Atlas of Asia

Author: J. G. Bartholomew

Release Date: September 30, 2012 [EBook #40900]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITERARY, HISTORICAL ATLAS OF ASIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved. Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_ and bold text by =equal
  signs=.

  - Manus Island, page 202. No location named. Should probably be East
  Indies.
  - Gulf of Kas, page 195. Missing longitude.
  - Fitze-long Bay, page 187. Wrong map coordinates.
  - The Index lists Dharmapuri, Diggi, Kang-ping and Radhan as having
  Glossary entries which do not exist.
  - Alternative spellings of Ibn Batuta include Batutu, Batatu, and
  Batouka.
  - Inconsistencies between latitude and longitude in the Index and the
  Glossary have been left as printed, including Ajmere, Bahera, Bitlis,
  Carmel, the Dead Sea, Deogarh, Dharwar, Diarbekr, Dondra Head,
  Elichpur, Hugli, Kagoshima, and Kamagawa.




     EVERYMAN'S LIBRARY
     EDITED BY ERNEST RHYS


     REFERENCE


     A LITERARY AND
     HISTORICAL ATLAS
     OF ASIA




THE PUBLISHERS OF _EVERYMAN'S LIBRARY_ WILL BE PLEASED TO SEND FREELY TO
ALL APPLICANTS A LIST OF THE PUBLISHED AND PROJECTED VOLUMES TO BE
COMPRISED UNDER THE FOLLOWING THIRTEEN HEADINGS:

     TRAVEL
     SCIENCE
     FICTION
     THEOLOGY & PHILOSOPHY
     HISTORY
     CLASSICAL
     FOR YOUNG PEOPLE
     ESSAYS
     ORATORY
     POETRY & DRAMA
     BIOGRAPHY
     REFERENCE
     ROMANCE

     IN FOUR STYLES OF BINDING: CLOTH, FLAT BACK, COLOURED TOP, LEATHER,
     ROUND CORNERS, GILT TOP; LIBRARY BINDING IN CLOTH, & QUARTER PIGSKIN

     LONDON: J. M. DENT & SONS, LTD.
     NEW YORK: E. P. DUTTON & CO.




  [Illustration: To THE WISE MAN ALL THE WORLD'S A SOIL
   BEN JONSON]




     A LITERARY &
     HISTORICAL
     ATLAS OF
     ASIA

     J G. BARTHOLOMEW LL.D


     LONDON: PUBLISHED
     by J·M·DENT & SONS LTD
     AND IN NEW YORK
     BY E·P·DUTTON & CO




INTRODUCTION


Fourth in the series of special atlases designed for "Everyman's
Library" the present volume deals with the countries of Asia, whose
history and geography, and whose possibilities, great and grave, are
alike reflected in the maps and charts that follow. When Queen Elizabeth
granted to certain merchants of London a charter that gave them a roving
commission to trade in the East Indies, she could not foresee the
immense developments that were to rise from that adventurous commerce
between east and west. The successive maps of India with their frontier
changes mark the gradual advance of an old world toward the new one knit
by powerful mutual ties to the Isle of Britain; and recently we have
seen what it is to be hoped will open a greater era for those regions,
marked by a return to the old capital of Delhi, and a resuming of
ancient rites which first gained their symbolism in those lands.

But Asia, as Japan has taught us and as China will undoubtedly teach us
again, has her own destiny to bear out, apart from our European
interests and politics; and it is in that aspect we need to study her on
the lines laid down and made clear and positive in this volume. It is
not the military records, the charts of mutinies and battle-fields,
interesting as they are, which are alone important; but those showing
the conditions, physical and climatic, of the country; the dispersion of
the tongues, the sites of the old religions, the wealth and tillage of
the earth with its fruits, grain and minerals, its rice fields and tea
plantations; the prevalence of rain, sun and trade-winds; and the course
of the sea-roads that affect its human and industrial life.

A gazetteer does not always seem to the ordinary man a very entertaining
thing, but in this of Asia its compiler, Miss Grant, has tried to mark
in brief, close compacted in small type, the place-associations,
historical and other, that give life to the names of town or country.
She has related them to the books that have dealt with them, and the
events they have witnessed: given Ning-po its allusion to Marco Polo's
travels, and Madras its San Thomé pedigree, connected Palmyra with
Tamerlane, and Puri, Bengal, with the gold tooth of the Buddha and the
Temple of Vishnu's incarnation. In the Brief Survey of the Coins and
Coinage, Mr. J. Allan (of the Coins and Medal Department, British
Museum) has traced the record from Lydia, six centuries and more B.C.,
to our own time. His notes on the Phoenician coins--"tetradrachms of
Tyre with a dolphin or the god Melkart riding on a sea-horse," or an owl
with a crook and a flail (Egyptian royal symbols); or the double shekels
of Sidon with a galley, sails, or oars, before a walled city on one
side, and a king of Persia on the other--show how much of history a set
of coins, apparently so secretive, may hide in their silver and gold
impressions.

In this Asian Atlas, of small dimensions as it requires to be to fit its
pocket, Irkutsk in the north, "far Mandalay," the details of the East
and West Indies, the route of Marco Polo, coasts like the Carnatic,
towns like Lucknow and Cawnpore, Lhasa, "the Forbidden City" of Tibet,
and Matsuye, the old capital of Idzumo, which Lafcadio Hearn describes,
all have their record. It remains to be said, that as in other volumes
of the same set, Dr. Bartholomew of Edinburgh has acted as cartographer;
and the editor and publishers wish to acknowledge his large practical
aid in the design of the atlas. Also, they owe a word of thanks to Mr.
William Foster of the India Office for his expert advice.

Finally, they wish to dedicate the volume to the people and the princes
of India, Japan, and the other countries of which it is a memorial,
believing in their great future.

     E. R.




CONTENTS


  COLOURED MAPS

                                                                  PAGE

  THE WORLD ACCORDING TO HECATÆUS, B.C. 500                          1

  THE WORLD ACCORDING TO ERATOSTHENES, B.C. 220                      2

  QUADRANS HABITABILIS ACCORDING TO ABU RIHAN BIRUNENSIS,
  A.D. 1030                                                          3

  EGYPTIAN EMPIRE, B.C. 1450                                         4

  BABYLONIAN EMPIRE, B.C. 560                                        5

  PERSIAN EMPIRE AT ITS GREATEST EXTENT, 525 B.C.                 6, 7

  EMPIRE OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT, 325 B.C.                         8, 9

  ASIA MINOR                                                    10, 11

  PALESTINE, OLD TESTAMENT                                          12

  PALESTINE, NEW TESTAMENT                                          13

  ASIA, EARLY EXPLORERS                                         14, 15

  ASIA, THIRTEENTH CENTURY                                          16

  ASIA, ABOUT 1740                                                  17

  INDIA, 1705                                                       18

  INDIA, 1765                                                       19

  INDIA, 1805                                                       20

  INDIA, 1857                                                       21

  THE FAR EAST, 1800                                            22, 23

  RUSSIAN ADVANCES IN CENTRAL ASIA                              24, 25

  THE WORLD ON MERCATOR'S PROJECTION, SHOWING ROUTES TO
  ASIA                                                          26, 27

  ASIA--OROGRAPHICAL                                                28

  RIVER BASINS                                                      29

  JANUARY TEMPERATURE                                               30

  JULY TEMPERATURE                                                  31

  JANUARY RAINFALL                                                  32

  JULY RAINFALL                                                     33

  MEAN ANNUAL RAINFALL                                              34

  VEGETATION                                                        35

  RACES                                                             36

  RELIGIONS                                                         37

  POPULATION                                                        38

  POLITICAL                                                         39

  ECONOMIC MAP OF ASIA ON MERCATOR'S PROJECTION                 40, 41

  TRADE ROUTES OF ASIA ON MERCATOR'S PROJECTION                 42, 43

  TURKEY IN ASIA, ARABIA, PERSIA, AFGHANISTAN, AND
  BALUCHISTAN                                                   44, 45

  ASIA MINOR, SYRIA, ETC.                                       46, 47

  SUEZ CANAL                                                        48

  ADEN                                                              49

  OROGRAPHICAL CENTRAL ASIA, WITH INDIAN FRONTIERS              50, 51

  INDIAN EMPIRE                                                 52, 53

  PRODUCTS OF INDIA                                             54, 55

  BOMBAY, BERAR, AND PART OF CENTRAL INDIA                      56, 57

  PUNJAB, SIND, RAJPUTANA, KASHMIR, ETC.                        58, 59

  UNITED AND CENTRAL PROVINCES, BENGAL, ASSAM, ETC.             60, 61

  MADRAS, HAIDARABAD, MYSORE, AND CEYLON                        62, 63

  ENVIRONS OF BOMBAY                                                64

  ENVIRONS OF CALCUTTA                                              65

  OROGRAPHICAL FARTHER INDIA                                        66

  BURMA                                                             67

  MALAY STATES                                                  68, 69

  SIAM AND INDO-CHINA                                           70, 71

  THE FAR EAST, ECONOMIC                                        72, 73

  EAST INDIES                                                   74, 75

  JAVA                                                              76

  PHILIPPINE ISLANDS                                                77

  ISLAND OF SINGAPORE                                               78

  HONG-KONG                                                         79

  CHINA AND JAPAN                                               80, 81

  NORTHERN CHINA                                                82, 83

  SOUTHERN CHINA                                                84, 85

  ENVIRONS OF PEKING AND SHANGHAI                                   86

  ENVIRONS OF HONG-KONG AND MANILA                                  87

  JAPAN                                                         88, 89

  KOREA AND MANCHURIA                                               90

  CENTRAL JAPAN                                                     91

  ENVIRONS OF TOKIO                                                 92

  ENVIRONS OF PORT-ARTHUR AND NAGASAKI                              93

  SIBERIA                                                       94, 95

  ENVIRONS OF VLADIVOSTOK                                           96


  A BRIEF SURVEY OF THE COINAGES OF ASIA, FROM
  THE EARLIEST TIMES TO THE PRESENT DAY, BY J. ALLAN,
  M.A., M.R.A.S.                                                    97


  LINE MAPS

  BATTLE OF SIRANGAPATAM, February 1792                            130

  BATTLE OF ASSAYE, September 1803                                 131

  BATTLE OF MEANEE, February 1843                                  131

  BATTLE OF ALIWAL, January 1846                                   132

  BATTLE OF SOBRAON, February 1846                                 132

  INDIAN MUTINY, SHOWING DISTRIBUTION OF TROOPS, May 1857          133

  ARYAN LANGUAGES OF INDIA                                         134

  NON-ARYAN LANGUAGES OF INDIA                                     135

  SITES OF ANCIENT INDIAN TEMPLES                             136, 137

  MILITARY DIVISIONS OF INDIA                                      138

  DELHI                                                            139

  LUCKNOW                                                          140

  CAWNPORE                                                         141

  LAHORE                                                           142

  RANGOON                                                          143

  LHASA, "THE FORBIDDEN CITY"                                      144


  A GAZETTEER OF TOWNS AND PLACES IN ASIA HAVING AN HISTORIC
  INTEREST                                                         145


  INDEX                                                            173




  [Illustration: THE WORLD
   according to
   HECATÆUS
   B.C. 500
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: THE WORLD
   according to
   ERATOSTHENES
   B.C. 220]

  [Illustration: QUADRANS HABITABILIS
   according to
   ABU RIHAN BIRUNENSIS
   A.D. 1030
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: EGYPTIAN EMPIRE
   B.C. 1450]

  [Illustration: BABYLONIAN EMPIRE
   B.C. 560
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: PERSIAN EMPIRE
   AT ITS GREATEST EXTENT
   525 B.C.
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: EMPIRE OF
   ALEXANDER THE GREAT
   325 B.C.
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: ASIA MINOR
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: PALESTINE
   OLD TESTAMENT]

  [Illustration: PALESTINE
   NEW TESTAMENT
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: ASIA
   EARLY EXPLORERS
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: ASIA
   13th CENTURY]

  [Illustration: ASIA
   ABOUT 1740
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: INDIA, 1705]

  [Illustration: INDIA, 1765
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: INDIA, 1805]

  [Illustration: INDIA, 1857
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: THE FAR EAST
   1800
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: RUSSIAN ADVANCES IN
   CENTRAL ASIA
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: THE WORLD
   ON MERCATORS PROJECTION.
   SHOWING
   ROUTES TO ASIA
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: ASIA
   OROGRAPHICAL]

  [Illustration: ASIA
   RIVER BASINS
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: ASIA
   JANUARY TEMPERATURE]

  [Illustration: ASIA
   JULY TEMPERATURE
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: ASIA
   JANUARY RAINFALL]

  [Illustration: ASIA
   JULY RAINFALL
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: ASIA
   MEAN ANNUAL RAINFALL]

  [Illustration: ASIA
   VEGETATION
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: ASIA
   RACES]

  [Illustration: ASIA
   RELIGIONS
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: ASIA
   POPULATION]

  [Illustration: ASIA
   POLITICAL
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: ECONOMIC MAP
   OF
   ASIA
   ON MERCATORS PROJECTION
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: TRADE ROUTES
   OF
   ASIA
   ON MERCATORS PROJECTION
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: TURKEY IN ASIA
   ARABIA, PERSIA
   AFGHANISTAN & BALUCHISTAN]

  [Illustration: ASIA MINOR, SYRIA &c.
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: SUEZ CANAL]

  [Illustration: ADEN
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: OROGRAPHICAL
   CENTRAL ASIA
   WITH INDIAN FRONTIERS
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: INDIAN EMPIRE
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: PRODUCTS OF INDIA]

  [Illustration: PRODUCTS OF INDIA
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: BOMBAY
   BERAR, AND PART OF
   CENTRAL INDIA
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: PUNJAB
   SIND, RAJPUTANA,
   KASHMIR, &c.
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: UNITED AND
   CENTRAL PROVINCES
   BENGAL, ASSAM, &c.
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: MADRAS
   HAIDARABAD, MYSORE,
   AND CEYLON
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: BOMBAY]

  [Illustration: CALCUTTA
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: OROGRAPHICAL
   FARTHER INDIA]

  [Illustration: BURMA
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: MALAY STATES]
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: SIAM & INDO-CHINA
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: THE FAR EAST
   ECONOMIC
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: EAST INDIES
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: JAVA]

  [Illustration: PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: ISLAND OF
   SINGAPORE]

  [Illustration: HONG-KONG
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: CHINA & JAPAN
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: NORTHERN CHINA
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: SOUTHERN CHINA
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: PEKING
   SHANGHAI
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: CANTON and HONG KONG]

  [Illustration: MANILA
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: JAPAN]

  [Illustration: FORMOSA & LU-CHU ISLANDS
   on the same scale
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: KOREA AND MANCHURIA]

  [Illustration: CENTRAL JAPAN
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: TOKIO]

  [Illustration: PORT ARTHUR
   NAGASAKI
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: SIBERIA
   John Bartholomew & Co., Edinburgh]

  [Illustration: VLADIVOSTOK]




     A
     BRIEF SURVEY
     OF THE
     COINAGES OF ASIA
     FROM THE
     EARLIEST TIMES
     TO THE
     PRESENT DAY




A BRIEF SURVEY

OF THE

COINAGES OF ASIA

FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES (700 B.C.) TO THE PRESENT DAY

BY J. ALLAN, M.A., M.R.A.S.

_Of the Department of Coins, British Museum_


The coins of Asia from the earliest times may be conveniently reviewed
in the following geographical and chronological sections: I. Ancient
coins of Western and Central Asia (to the rise of Islam, excluding the
majority of Greek and Roman coins which have no claim to be Asiatic);
II. Mohammadan coins of Western and Central Asia; III. Coins of India
(Hindu and Mohammadan); IV. Coins of the Far East; V. Coins struck by
European nations for their Asiatic possessions.


I.--ANCIENT COINS OF WESTERN AND CENTRAL ASIA

_Origin of Coinage in Lydia._--According to Herodotus (I. 94) the
Lydians were the first people to strike coins of gold and silver, while
other writers attribute the invention of coinage to Pheidon, king of
Argos, who struck coins in Aegina. The truth appears to be that gold, or
rather electrum, was first coined in Lydia in the seventh century B.C.,
while silver was first minted in Aegina about the same time. The
earliest Lydian coins are believed to have been issued in the time of
Gyges, king of Lydia (687-652 B.C.). These are rude oval pieces of
electrum, a natural mixture of gold and silver found locally, and are
stamped on one side only (Plate I. 1). The uncertain value of this metal
was found an embarrassment to commerce, and Croesus (561-546 B.C.),
under whose rule Lydia became a great and wealthy power, introduced a
coinage of pure gold and of pure silver, ten staters of silver being
equal to one of gold (Plate I. 2, gold stater).

_Persia._--When Cyrus conquered Lydia in 546 B.C., the Persians, who,
like the Assyrians, had no coined money, became acquainted with the art
of coinage. It is not certain when the Persians began to issue coins,
but from the statement of Herodotus that Darius Hystaspis (521-486 B.C.)
coined gold of the finest quality, and the probable etymology of "daric"
from Darius, the beginning of the Achaemenid coinage is placed in his
reign; it is most probable that it was at Sardes in Lydia that Darius
first struck his coins, as there he would be most likely to find skilled
artificers. The coins of the Persian empire were the _daric_ of gold
about equal in value to the stater of Croesus (or rather more than an
English sovereign in metal value) and the _siglos_ (_shekel_) of which
twenty were the equivalent of a daric. The types were the same on each
coin, viz., on the obverse, the Persian King in a half-kneeling position
holding a bow in his left hand and a spear in his right, while the
reverse still had no type but only a rough incuse caused in striking the
coins (Plate I. 3, daric). These two coins remained the official coinage
of the Persian empire till its fall. The conquered Greek cities were not
allowed to strike gold, but the issue of silver and copper by them was
not interfered with; in addition certain Persian satraps were allowed to
issue silver coins bearing their own names.

_Phoenicia._--In spite of their commercial activity, the Phoenician
cities of the Mediterranean coast did not begin to strike coins until
comparatively late times, the end of the fifth and beginning of the
fourth centuries B.C. We possess extensive silver coinages of the fourth
century for most of these cities, those of Tyre and Sidon being
particularly important. The tetradrachms of Tyre have as types, a
dolphin or the god Melkart riding on a sea-horse and an owl with crook
and flail, Egyptian symbols of royalty (Plate I. 4, _c._ 410-332 B.C.).
The double shekels of Sidon bear on the obverse a galley with sails or
rowers often before a walled city, and on the reverse the suzerain king
of Persia in a chariot (Plate I. 5, _c._ 400-384 B.C.).

_Imitations of Athenian coins._--The coins of Athens circulated very
widely in the ancient world, particularly in Central Asia, where
imitations of them were made when the Athenian mint could no longer
supply the demand (Plate I. 6, imitation of Athenian tetradrachm). On
some of these imitations the owl was replaced by an eagle, while
Athenian influence can still be traced in the remarkably neat coins of
Sophytes (Plate I. 11, reverse, cock), whom Alexander found reigning on
the North-West Indian frontier on his march across it in 326 B.C.

_Alexander III., the Great._--When the Persian empire fell before
Alexander the Great his coins became current throughout Asia, from the
Mediterranean to the Indus, and profoundly influenced all later
coinages. His gold coins (the stater, with its multiple the distater and
its sub-divisions) have on the obverse a head of Athena, and on the
reverse a winged Victory with the king's name; the silver (drachm, with
multiples and subdivisions) has on the obverse a head of the young
Herakles in lion-skin, and reverse, Zeus seated on throne holding eagle
and sceptre (Plate I. 7). Tetradrachms bearing Alexander's name and
types continued to be struck for a century and a half after his death,
and they are at the present day the commonest of ancient coins.

_Seleucid Kings of Syria._--We possess an extensive series of coins of
the Seleucid kings of Syria, the dynasty founded by Seleucus Nikator
(312-280 B.C.), the general of Alexander who succeeded to his Asiatic
heritage. The earliest Seleucid coins (before 306 B.C.) retained the
name and types of Alexander, but soon a greater variety of types was
adopted, while the king's head began to appear regularly on the obverse.
The Seleucid coins are remarkable for the unique series of portraits
they give us. One of the commonest types of the Seleucid series has the
king's head on the obverse, and a seated Apollo with bow and arrow on
the reverse (Plate I. 8, gold stater of Antiochus I., 280-266 B.C.;
Plate I. 10, silver tetradrachm of Antiochus IV., 175-166 B.C.).

_Bactria._--About the middle of the third century B.C. the empire
founded by Seleucus began to break up. A line of kings was founded in
Bactria by Diodotos, a revolted satrap, whose independence Antiochus II.
had to acknowledge. The earlier coins of these kings, who afterwards
crossed into India and gradually lost their Hellenism, present some of
the finest examples of portraiture on Greek coins (Plate I. 9, gold
stater of Diodotos I., _c._ 250 B.C.).

_Judaea._--Among the smaller kingdoms who became independent of the
Seleucids in the second century B.C. may be mentioned that of the Jews.
Certain shekels, bearing on the obverse a chalice with the legend
"shekel of Israel," and on the reverse a branch with three buds and the
legend "Jerusalem the Holy" (Plate II. 1), have been attributed to Simon
Maccabaeus (143-135 B.C.), but they may belong to the First Revolt
(66-70 A.D.).

_Parthia._--About the same period, the great Parthian kingdom was
founded in Central Asia and lasted till 220 A.D. The Parthian coinage is
of silver (drachms and tetradrachms) and bronze. Although Parthian
drachms are at the present day one of the most extensive of ancient
coinages, their classification is exceedingly difficult on account of
our ignorance of Parthian history, and the fact that the coins do not
bear the name of the issuer but of Arsakes, the founder of the dynasty.
The silver drachms bear on the obverse the portrait of the reigning
king, and on the reverse the first king Arsakes seated holding a bow,
with a legend in Greek characters which is at first simply (coin of)
"the king Arsakes" (Plate II. 2, drachm of Mithridates I. the Great,
171-138 B.C.), but gradually increases in length till a century later it
assumes the form (coin of) "the king of kings Arsakes, the just, the
illustrious, the beneficent, the friend of the Greeks," which remains
the usual legend. Tetradrachms with similar legends were also struck in
large numbers; their usual reverse type is the Parthian king seated,
receiving a wreath from the goddess of Victory or from a City goddess
(Plate II. 3, tetradrachm of Phraates IV., 38-3 B.C.). After the reign
of Phraates IV. the coins are dated in the Seleucid era, while the later
coins bear a Pehlevi legend in addition to the Greek inscription which
is by this time almost unintelligible.

_Sassanian Empire._--Early in the third century A.D. the last remnants
of Parthian power were destroyed by Ardashir, a Persian prince, who
founded the Sassanian empire, which after successfully disputing the
supremacy of Asia with the Romans for four centuries finally fell before
the conquering hosts of Islam. The Sassanian silver coins, particularly
of the later kings, are exceedingly numerous at the present day, but the
gold and copper are rare. The types of the gold and silver are
throughout the dynasty the same; on the obverse is the head of the king
with a long legend of the form, "Ardashir, worshipper of Ahura Mazda,
divine king of kings of Iran, a scion of the celestial race," on the
reverse a fire-altar, usually with two attendant priests, and at first
the legend "the fire of Ardashir" (etc.), later the mint and regnal year
of issue. The earlier coins are of remarkably good workmanship, and give
us fine portraits of the Sassanian kings (Plate II. 4, gold coin of
Ardashir I., 226-241 A.D.; Plate II. 5, silver drachm of Sapor I.,
241-272 A.D.). The gold coins weigh rather less than an English
sovereign, and their standard appears to be derived from Roman solidi;
the silver coins are drachms following the Parthian standard, and,
particularly the latter pieces, are remarkable for their thin fabric
(_e.g._ Plate II. 7, Khusrau (Chosroes) II., Parvez, 590-628 A.D.) which
was copied by the Arabs in their silver coins, and can be traced in
certain Mohammadan series to the present day.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.--B. V. Head, _Historia Numorum_ (Oxford, 1911), pp.
643-845; B. V. Head, _Coinage of Lydia and Persia_ (London, 1878);
British Museum Catalogue of Greek Coins, _Lydia_ (1901), _Syria_ (1878),
_Parthia_ (1905), _Phoenicia_ (1910); E. Babelon, _Perses Acheménides_
(Paris, 1893); E. Babelon, _Rois de Syrie_ (Paris, 1890); Dorn &
Bartholomaei, _Monnaies Sassanides_ (St. Petersburg, 1875).


II.--MOHAMMADAN COINAGES

(_Exclusive of India_)

_Beginnings of Arab Coinage._--The Arabs were unacquainted with the art
of coinage till they learned it on their campaigns of conquest in Syria
(Byzantine) and Persia (Sassanian). At first they were content to issue
gold and copper pieces imitated from contemporary Byzantine coins (Plate
II. 9, early copper coin of Abd-al-Malik; obverse, figure of the Caliph;
reverse, modified Byzantine cross), while their silver pieces were
copies of late Sassanian coins (like Plate II. 7), with the addition of
_bismillah_ (in the name of God) on the margin.

_Abd-al-Malik's Reformed Currency._--Though one traditionist says that
even Adam felt the need for money and struck dinars and dirhems, more
reliable authorities agree in attributing to Abd-al-Malik, the fifth
Omayyad Caliph (684-705 A.D.), the institution in 696 A.D. of a purely
Muslim coinage, worthy of the great Arab empire and the foundations on
which it was built. This coinage was of gold, silver, and copper, and
the names _dinar_ (denarius aureus), _dirhem_ (drachma), and _falus_
(follis), which have remained in use practically to the present day,
were borrowed from the Byzantines. The dinar originally weighed rather
more than half a sovereign, while the dirhem was a little less than
sixpence in English money, but the names came to mean simply gold and
silver coin respectively.

Mohammad's interdiction of any form of image-making, as savouring of
idolatry, limited the orthodox Caliph to legends on his coins, but
thereby gave Arab coins an importance as historical documents possessed
by no other series. From the earliest times they bore the mint and date
(in the Mohammadan era dating from 622 A.D.), and later the ruler's name
and titles, often including valuable genealogical data, were added. The
right of striking coins was one of the privileges of sovereignty, and
Muslim coins thus throw a good deal of light on Arab history.

Plate II. 6 is a dinar, and Plate II. 8 a dirhem of Abd-al-Malik; both
bear on the obverse the profession of faith, "There is no god but God;
He hath no associate:" around the reverse of the dinar is the legend,
"In the name of God this dinar was struck in the year 77" (696 A.D.),
while the similar inscription on the dirhem includes the mint (Damascus,
79 A.H.) and is placed around the obverse. On both the reverse areas is
"God is alone; God is eternal; He begets not and is not begotten" (the
dinar ends here, but the dirhem continues) "nor is there any one like
unto Him" (Koran, cxii.). Around the obverse of the dinar and reverse of
the dirhem is, "Mohammad is the prophet of God, sent with guidance and
the religion of truth to make it prevail over all other religions"
(dinar stops here), "averse though the idolaters may be" (Koran ix. 33).

_Abbasids._--In 750 A.D. the Abbasids overthrew the Omayyads, and at
first made but superficial alterations in the coinage; the long reverse
formula was replaced by the simple profession, "Mohammad is the prophet
of God." Plate III. 2, a dinar of the "good" Caliph Harun-al-Rashid
(786-809 _A.D._) is typical of the period, except that it bears the name
of his ill-fated vizier, Ja'afar, who will be remembered by readers of
the _Arabian Nights_ as the companion of the Caliph's nocturnal
ramblings, on whom this signal honour was conferred. In the ninth
century a second marginal inscription, "To God belongs the order before
and after, and in that day the believers shall rejoice in the help of
God" (Koran, xxx. 3, 4) was added on the obverse, while the Caliph's
name begins to appear regularly on the reverse area.

_Contemporaries of the Caliphs._--Coins with similar legends were struck
by the various dynasties which arose on the weakening of the authority
of the Caliph in the ninth and tenth centuries. In addition to the
ruler's name they usually bear the name of the reigning Caliph, whose
spiritual authority was still recognised; such are Plate III. 1, a
dirhem of the Samanid Nasr b. Ahmad struck in 300 A.H. at Samarkand,
which was then one of the great centres of Mohammadan learning and
literary activity; Plate III. 4, a Buwayhid dinar of Rukn-al-Daula
(932-976 A.D.), struck at Hamadan in 352 A.H., bearing the name of the
_fainéant_ Caliph al-Muti; and Plate III. 6, a dinar, struck at Rayy,
447 A.H., of the Great Seljuk Toghrul Beg (1037-1063 A.D.), the Turkish
conqueror of Western Asia whose descendants were among the most
redoubtable of the "Saracens." Plate III. 3, a dinar of the last Abbasid
Caliph--Al-Mustasim (1242-1258 A.D.), illustrates the change in the
fabric and calligraphy of the coinage which had taken place in six
centuries. Plate III. 5 is a dinar of Mahmud of Ghazni (998-1030 A.D.),
with the reverse legend in Sanskrit for the benefit of his Indian
subjects.

_Seljuks, Ortukids, and Ayyubids_ (_Saracens_).--Plate III. 7, a dirhem
of Sulaiman II. (1199-1203 A.D.), a Seljuk of Asia Minor, is the first
of a series of striking deviations from the orthodox Mohammadan type,
prompted as much by necessities of commerce with Christian nations as by
a lack of orthodoxy on the part of their issuers, heretics though they
were. The obverse area is occupied by a horseman holding a mace over his
shoulder, while around is the Shia form of the Mohammadan creed (as
above, with the addition of the words "Ali is the friend of God"); the
reverse bears the usual data. Plate III. 8 is a dirhem of one of his
successors Kaikubad I. (1219-1236 A.D.), a fine specimen of the
calligraphy of the period; Plate III. 9, is a dirhem of his successor,
Kai-Khusru II. (1136-1245 A.D.), bearing the "lion and sun," the
horoscope of his beautiful Georgian wife, whose portrait he wished to
place on his coins, till his counsellors persuaded him to be content
with her horoscope. The coins of the Ortukids, who were also prominent
opponents of the Crusaders, are remarkable for their immense variety of
types borrowed from all sources (Greek, Roman, Byzantine, etc.). Plate
IV. 1, reverse of a copper coin of Kara Arslan (1148-1174 A.D.), and
Plate IV. 2, of a copper coin of Alpi (1152-1176 A.D.), represent Christ
seated and the Virgin crowning the emperor respectively, both well-known
Byzantine types. The Saracen best known by name to English readers is
Saladin the Ayyubid Sultan of Egypt and Syria (1169-93 A.D.) whose
capture of Jerusalem in 1187 provoked the Third Crusade in which Richard
I., Coeur-de-Lion, took a prominent part. Plate IV. 3 is a dirhem
struck by him at Damascus, his Syrian capital, in 582 A.H. (1186 A.D.).

_Mongols._--In the thirteenth century the Mongols, led by the Chingiz
Khan (1206-1227 A.D.), one of the greatest conquerors the world has
known, subjugated practically all Asia with the exception of India.
Plate IV. 4 is one of the rare coins attributed to Chingiz Khan, while
Plate IV. 5 is a handsome dinar struck by Arghun, one of the earliest
(1284-1295 A.D.) of the Persian line of Mongols (obverse, Mohammadan
(Shia) creed and date, etc.; reverse, the Khan's titles, etc., in
Mongol). Tamerlane (1369-1404 A.D.) (Timur Lang, Timur the Lame), a
distant descendant of Chingiz Khan, is another great conqueror familiar
to English readers through Marlowe and Gibbon. One of the coins struck
by him, with the name of his nominal sovereign, Suyurghatmish, is
figured on Plate IV. 6. Plate IV. 7 is a dirhem of his son and ultimate
successor, Shah Rukh (1404-1447 A.D.), of a type (obverse, Mohammadan
creed, with the names of the four orthodox Caliphs around the margin;
reverse, titles) which was very popular in the fifteenth and sixteenth
century. Plate IV. 8 is an early Ottoman coin struck by Mohammad I.
(1402-1421 A.D.) at Brusa in 822 A.H. (1419 A.D.), of a type which
served the Turks for some centuries.

_Persia._--The earliest coins of the Shahs of Persia (_e.g._ Plate IV.
10, reverse of a silver coin of Ismail I. (1502-1524 A.D.) struck at
Meshhed in 924 A.H. (1518 A.D.)) are of the type instituted by Shah
Rukh to which they may be traced through the Shaibanid coinage; the
later Persian coins are smaller and thicker (Plate IV. 12, mohur of the
great conqueror Nadir Shah (1736-1747 A.D.)). Plate IV. 11, a gold tuman
of Fath-Ali Shah (1797-1834 A.D.), the first Shah with whom England
entered into diplomatic relations, is a remarkable fine product of the
Persian mint. Nasir-al-Din (1848-1896 A.D.) instituted a mint on the
European model in Teheran, and struck coins with his portrait (_e.g._
Plate IV. 13, a gold tuman), or the Lion and Sun, on the obverse and his
titles on the reverse.

_Bukhara._--The coins of the Emirs of Bukhara, now under Russian
suzerainty, are mainly of gold (_e.g._ Plate IV. 9, a gold tila of the
fanatical Haidar Tora, 1800-1826 A.D.).

_Afghanistan._--The Emirs (Durrani and Barakzai) of Afghanistan, who
became independent of Persia in the eighteenth century, adopted the
standards and types of their Moghul contemporaries. A mint on the
European model has recently been established in Kabul, and its coins are
rapidly replacing older issues.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.--O. Codrington, _Musulman Numismatics_ (London, 1904); S.
Lane-Poole, _Mohammadan Dynasties_ (London, 1894); British Museum
Catalogue of Oriental Coins, vols, i.-x.; British Museum Catalogue of
Persian Coins, _Shahs of Persia_ (1887); W. H. Valentine, _Copper Coins
of Modern Muhammadan States_ (London, 1911); M. Longworth Dames, _Coins
of the Durranis_ (_Numismatic Chronicle_, 1888); L. White King, _Coins
of the Barakzais_ (_Numismatic Chronicle_, 1896).


III.--COINS OF INDIA

_Early Hindu Coins._--The earliest coins of India are square or oblong
pieces of silver or copper punched with various symbols, the exact
significance of which is not exactly known. They were probably made by
money-changers or by the authority responsible for the purity of the
coin. These pieces date from as early as the fourth century B.C. and
circulated all over India (Plate V. 1). To a somewhat later date belong
the coins of various native states in North India; these soon became
profoundly influenced by the coinages of foreign invaders, and indeed it
is only lately that the independent origin of coinage in India has been
generally recognised (Plate V. 3, silver coin of the Kuninda king,
Amoghabhuti, second century B.C.).

_Foreign Invaders._--Early in the second century B.C., in the reign of
Euthydemus, the Greeks of Bactria began to invade India. We possess
coins of his son Demetrius, of the square Indian form with an Indian
legend on the reverse, showing a compromise between the Greek and Indian
methods of coinage. Henceforth the coins of his successors, many of whom
are otherwise unknown to history, are bilingual (Plate V. 2, hemidrachm
of Apollodotos I., _c._ 150 B.C.). Towards the end of the second century
B.C. the Scythians invaded Bactria and India; their coins are imitated
from those of their Greek predecessors, but are much inferior as works
of art (Plate V. 4, silver coin of Azes I., _c._ 90 B.C.).

They were followed about the middle of the first century B.C. by the
Kushans who founded a great empire in North-West India. The Kushan kings
of whom the greatest was Kanishka, famed in Buddhist legend, have left a
great wealth of gold and copper coins remarkable for the variety of
deities (Zoroastrian, Greek, Hindu, and Buddha) depicted on their
reverses (Plate V. 5, gold coin of Kanishka).

_Andhras and Western Satraps._--During the first three centuries A.D.
the Western Satraps, a dynasty of Scythic origin, ruled a powerful
kingdom in Western India. Their coinage of silver, forming a long dated
series, appears to be derived from hemidrachms of the Greek kings
possibly influenced by Roman denarii (Plate V. 8, Damaghsada, _c._ 180
A.D.). Unique among India coinages is the lead coinage of the Andhras
who ruled in Central and Southern India from the third century B.C.
till they fell before the Satraps (Plate V. 7, Vilivayakura, _c._ 100
A.D.; reverse only).

_Guptas._--A new era in the history of India begins in the fourth
century A.D. with the rise of the Gupta dynasty which conquered
practically all India and held it for two centuries. Their coinage,
mainly of gold, is derived from the Kushan, but displays great
originality and variety of types, and has legends in pure Sanskrit
(Plate V. 9, gold coin (_suvarna_) of Samudragupta, 340-380 A.D.,
commemorating his horse-sacrifice on his conquests; V. 10, _suvarna_ of
Kumaragupta I., 414-450 A.D.).

_Huns._--The Gupta empire finally fell before the inroads of barbarous
Huns, who swept down through Persia on India about the same time that
their kinsmen under Attila were ravaging Europe. They have left numerous
coins imitated from Sassanian or Indian types (Plate V. 12, silver coin
of Toramana, _c._ 514-544 A.D., with Sassanian types). From the Hun
imitations of Sassanian coins are descended certain coins of very rude
fabric known to the natives as "asses' head" money, which circulated
very largely in North India from the sixth to the eighth century (Plate
V. 11).

_Mediaeval Hindu Dynasties._--The later Kushan type (Plate V. 6, gold,
_c._ 250 A.D.), with a king standing, sacrificing at altar on the
obverse and a goddess enthroned facing on the reverse, survived for
centuries on the base gold and rude copper coins of Kashmir (Plate VI.
1, gold, Yasovarman, _c._ 730 A.D.), and the seated goddess remains a
familiar type on the gold coins of the mediaeval Hindu dynasties of the
present United and Central Provinces, and even survived on the coins of
Mohammadan invaders (Plate VI. 4, gold coin of Hallakshanavarman,
1097-1110 A.D., of Jejahuti). Among the commonest of Indian coins are
the silver "Bull and Horseman" coins of the Brahman kings of Kandahar
(Plate VI. 2, Spalapatideva, _c._ 875 A.D.), the types of which were
copied by various Hindu kings (_e.g._ Plate VI. 3, Prithvi-Raja of
Delhi, 1166-1192 A.D.) and retained by their Mohammadan conquerors.

_South India._--In South India the primitive punch-marked coins remained
much longer in circulation than in the north, and from the frequent
finds of Roman gold and silver coins, it is probable that these formed
the major part of the currency in the early centuries of the Christian
era. Many of the Hindu coins of South India are uninscribed, and their
attribution is still uncertain. To the Chera dynasty of Malabar are
attributed certain gold coins having an elephant on the obverse (Plate
V. 13, thirteenth century). Copper coins, having on the obverse a figure
of the king standing and on the reverse the king seated, were introduced
by Rajaraja of the Chola dynasty (_c._ 1030 A.D.); this type spread
through South India, was introduced into Ceylon on the Chola conquest,
and adopted there by the independent kings of Kandy (Plate VI. 7,
Parakramabahu, 1153-1186 A.D.). Thick gold cup-shaped pieces are
attributed to the Western Chalukyas of the Deccan (eighth century A.D.,
Plate VI. 6), while large thin gold coins were struck by the eastern
branch of the family (Plate VI. 8, Rajaraja, 1021-1062 A.D.); both bear
the Chalukya emblem, the boar. Certain cup-shaped gold pieces bearing a
lotus were struck by the Kadambas of Northern Mysore (Plate VI. 9). The
great mediaeval Hindu kingdom of Vijayanagara (Mysore) has left an
extensive series of gold and copper coins. Its small gold coins called
pagodas (Plate VI. 5, Venkata Raya, _c._ 1530-1542 A.D.), bearing one or
more deities on the obverse, formed the pattern for later coinages not
only of the native states but also of various European invaders of South
India.

_Sultans of Delhi._--When Mohammad bin Sam (1193-1205 A.D.) defeated the
allied Hindu forces on the plain of Thaneswar in 1193 he became master
of India and founded the dynasty known as the Sultans of Delhi, which
survived till the Moghul conquest. In addition to striking coins of the
usual Mohammadan type he copied the coins of his Hindu predecessors
(_e.g._ Plate VI. 10, copper, _cf._ 2 and 3; VI. 11, gold, _cf._ 4). The
coins of his successors are the tanka (about 175 grains) in gold and in
silver, in addition to smaller coins of copper and billon. Plate VI. 13
may be taken as typical; it is a gold tanka of Mohammad III. bin Tughlak
(1324-1351 A.D.); on one side it bears the name of the Sultan,
"Mohammad Shah Sultan who trusts in the support of the Merciful One,"
with a marginal inscription giving the date and mint (Delhi, 726 A.H.
(1326 A.D.)); on the other side is a form of the Muslim creed. Plate VI.
12 is one of the remarkable brass tokens with which the same Sultan
sought to displace gold and silver money. It bears a legend giving the
value at which it was to pass, and an appeal to the piety of his
subjects in a legend from the Koran, "He that obeys the Sultan obeys the
Merciful One." Though no fraud was intended, this token currency was a
failure. Plate VI. 14 is a silver tanka of Sher Shah (1539-1545 A.D.),
one of the last and one of the greatest of the Sultans of Delhi. The
obverse bears the Mohammadan creed and the names of the first four
caliphs on the margin, a type which survived for two centuries longer in
the Moghul coins. The coins of the various Mohammadan states which
became independent of Delhi in the fifteenth century cannot be detailed
here. Plate VII. 1, a silver tanka of Ghiyas-al-Din of Malwa (1468-1500
A.D.), may be taken as typical of them.

_Moghul Emperors._--The Moghul Emperors made but little change in the
types and standards of the coins of their predecessors, but gave the
standard gold coin the name mohur, while the silver was called the
rupee. Plate VII. 2 is a mohur of Jalal-al-Din ("Glory of the Faith"),
Mohammad Akbar (1556-1605 A.D.), struck at Agra in 976 A.H. (1568 A.D.),
similar in type to Sher Shah's tanka (Plate VI. 14). The coins of his
son Nur-al-Din ("Light of the Faith"), Mohammad Jahangir (1605-1627
A.D.), are the most remarkable of the series. Plate VII. 3, a mohur of
Jahangir, is a fine specimen of calligraphy (obverse, Mohammadan creed;
reverse, titles and mint; Lahore, 1015 A.H.), while Plate VII. 4 is the
obverse (Ram) of a mohur of the remarkable series issued by him bearing
the signs of the zodiac. Jahangir was, like many of the Moghuls, a heavy
drinker, and went so far as to portray himself with the wine cup in his
hand on a well-known mohur (Plate VII. 5). Plate VII. 6, a mohur of his
successor Shihab-al-Din ("Flame of the Faith"), Shah Jahan (1628-1659),
is typical of the coinage of the period (obverse as Plate VII. 2,
reverse, titles; Agra, 1050 A.H. (1640 A.D.)). His successor, Aurangzib
(1659-1707 A.D.), replaced the religious legends on the obverse by the
mint and date, and this remained the usual type to the end of the
series. (Plate VII. 7, mohur of Shah Alam II. 1759-1806 A.D.; Delhi,
1205 A.H.).

At the end of the eighteenth century numerous states became practically
independent of the Great Moghul, but struck coins which still bore his
name. When the last Moghul Emperor was deposed in 1858, the name of
Queen Victoria began to appear on the coins of such native states as
were allowed to continue issuing coins. To attain uniformity in the
currency of the empire this right has been gradually curtailed by the
British government, and is now exercised only by a few of the more
important states, such as Hyderabad, which issues coins struck by modern
European machinery.

_Assam and Nepal._--Two important Hindu kingdoms, Assam and Nepal, were
never subject to the Moghuls. The kings of Assam issued an extensive
coinage (octagonal in form) till their territory was acquired by Britain
(Plate VII. 8, rupee "of the divine king Siva Sinha (1714-1744 A.D.) a
bee on the lotus feet of Hara and Gauri"). Plate VII. 9 is a silver
mohur of Prthvi Vira Vikrama (1881) of Nepal, the reigning Maharaja of
Nepal.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.--E. J. Rapson, _Indian Coins_ (Strassburg, 1897); Sir A.
Cunningham, _Coins of Ancient India_ (London, 1891), _Coins of Mediaeval
India_ (1894); British Museum Catalogue of Indian Coins, _Greek and
Scythic Kings_ (1886), _Andhras and Western Ksatrapas_ (1908), _Sultans
of Delhi_ (1885), _Muhammadan States_ (1885), _Moghul Emperors_ (1891);
Catalogue of Coins in the Indian Museum, vol. i. by V. A. Smith (Oxford,
1906), vols. ii. and iii. (1907, 1908) by H. Nelson Wright; E. H. Walsh,
_The Coins of Nepal_ (_Journ. of Roy. Asiat. Society_, 1907); J. Allan,
_Coinage of Assam_ (_Num. Chron._, 1908).


IV.--THE COINAGES OF THE FAR EAST

_China._--The earliest coins of China, like those of Western Asia, date
from the seventh century B.C.: these are small bronze spades and knives,
copies of the actual spades, knives, or rather billhooks, and other
small articles of husbandry which had previously been used for barter.
The knives are about seven inches long and bear an inscription giving
the weight or value and the name of the town or confederacy which issued
it; a modified form of the spade money, called the _pu_ (flattened)
money, circulated widely in the fifth and fourth centuries B.C. (Plate
VIII. 1, a _pu_ coin of the town of Lu-Yang). Round money had been made
as early as the fourth century B.C., but it was not till 221 B.C. that
the great reformer Shih Huang Ti (221-210 B.C.), the "First Emperor,"
definitely superseded all previous currencies by round coins. His coins
were pieces of half an ounce (_pan-liang_), and were continued by the
Han dynasty (Plate VIII. 6, a _pan-liang_ of the Empress Kao Hou,
187-179 B.C.).

This coinage gradually became so debased and counterfeited that in 118
B.C. the Emperor Wu Ti (122-117 B.C.) issued a new bronze coinage of
five-_chu_ pieces (Plate VIII. 2); the five-_chu_ piece remained the
standard coin for the next eight centuries. The attempted monetary
reforms of the usurper Wang Mang (9-22 A.D.) may be mentioned here. In
addition to reviving a modified _pu_ and knife money (Plate VIII. 4), he
instituted a round coinage (_ho tsiuen_, Plate VIII. 3), but after his
assassination and the restoration of the Han dynasty the five-_chu_
piece was restored. The history of Chinese currency is henceforth a
continual struggle between the government and the counterfeiter. On one
occasion at least, the government sought to get rid of the forgers by
making the most skilled of them mint officials.

In 618 A.D. the Tang emperor Kao Tsu (618-627 A.D.) issued the _Kai yuan
tung pao_, "current money of the inauguration" (_i.e._ of the Tang
dynasty, Plate VIII. 5), which gave the coinages of the Far East the
form they have retained almost to the present day. From the time of the
Sung dynasty (960-1120 A.D.) onwards the legend took the form "current
money of" (name of regnal period) (Plate VIII. 8, "current money of
(the) Sung Yuan" period, 960-976 A.D.). The Southern Sung dynasty
(1127-1278 A.D.) dated their coins on the reverse in regnal years. The
Mongols (1260-1341 A.D.) issued but little copper money. An account of
their extensive paper currency in the reign of Kublai Khan (1260-1295
A.D.) is given by Marco Polo. The Ming dynasty (1368-1628 A.D.) placed
the mint-name on the reverse, while the Ching dynasty (1628-1911) placed
the mint-name in Manchu on the reverse (Plate VIII. 7, Shun-che period,
1644-1662 A.D.; Pekin mint).

It is only recently that a serious attempt to institute a silver coinage
in China has been made. In the nineties of last century, mints with
European machinery were instituted in each province, and struck silver
and copper coins of European fabric (Plate IX. 1, half-dollar of the
late Emperor Kuang Hsü, 1875-1910) for Sze-Chuan. During the last thirty
years bilingual silver coins have been issued for the Mohammadan
population of Chinese Turkestan (Plate IX. 6, reverse of a five mithkal
piece of Kashgar). One of the most remarkable of Chinese coins is the
silver rupee recently issued for the Sze-chuan province, bearing the
Emperor's head, and copied from the Indian rupee, with which it is
destined to compete for Tibetan trade (Plate IX. 3).

_Japan._--The Japanese borrowed the art of coinage from the Chinese, and
issued coins as early as 708 A.D. Plate VIII. 9 is an early Japanese
copper coin or _sen_ of the period 818-835 A.D. (inscription--"Divine
Treasure of Wealth and Longevity"). From the tenth to the sixteenth
centuries the main coinage of Japan consisted of imitations of
contemporary Chinese coins. One of the commonest of Japanese coins is
the _kwan-ei_ sen (Plate VIII. 10), which was extensively issued from
1624-1859. Large, flat gold coins (_obans_ and _kobans_) were
frequently issued from the sixteenth to nineteenth centuries. The
smaller gold and silver coins of this period are rectangular (Plate IX.
7, a gold _bu_ of 1837 A.D.). Plate IX. 4 is the obverse of a coin (a
piece of 5 _momme_) with an interesting history. In 1765, a high
official named Taruna ordered that all silver ornaments should be
confiscated as useless luxuries and made into coins. This edict aroused
great indignation, particularly among the fair sex, and its enforcement
was one of the causes which led to the assassination of the tyrannical
governor. In 1869 a mint with European machinery was established in
Tokio, and a coinage of gold, silver (_yen_ or dollar), and copper
(_sen_, 100 = 1 dollar) on the European model adopted (Plate IX. 5, 50
sen of the sixth year of Meiji, 1873).

_Corea, Annam, and Siam._--Corea issued bronze coins in the Chinese
style in its various intervals of independence. The commonest is the
_Shang Ping_ cash issued at various mints from 1790 to 1881 (Plate VIII.
11). Plate IX. 2 is a piece of one _yang_ (silver) issued by the new
mint in 1898. Japanese influence may be traced in it (_cf._ Plate IX.
5), as on the Chinese coin of Kashgar (Plate IX. 6). The kings of Annam
issued an extensive coinage modelled on the Chinese till Annam became a
French possession. Siam has issued a coinage struck by European
machinery since 1850 (Plate IX. 8, rupee of Phra Chom Klao, 1850-1868
A.D.).


BIBLIOGRAPHY.--Terrien de Lacouperie, British Museum Catalogue of
Chinese Coins, vol. i. (all published) (1892); J. H. S. Lockhart,
_Currency of the Farther East_ (Hong-Kong, 1893-1895); H. G. Munro,
_Coinage of Japan_ (Yokohama, 1904); A. Schroeder, _Annam, Etudes
Numismatiques_ (Paris, 1905).


V.--COINS OF EUROPEAN POSSESSIONS IN ASIA

_English._--In 1600 Queen Elizabeth granted a Royal Charter to "The
Governor and Company of Merchants of London trading into the East
Indies," and soon afterwards ordered silver coins to be struck at the
Tower Mint for the Company's use in the Indies (Plate X. 2, sixpence or
real of this issue). In 1677 the first English mint in India was
established at Bombay, which had come to Charles II. in 1662 as part of
the dowry of Catherine of Braganza, and rupees and copper cash were
issued in the name of Charles II., or "bearing the name of their impure
king" as an indignant Moghul historian describes them. For trade with
the natives, however, the Company required coins of a type familiar to
them, and had to send their bullion to be minted at the Moghul mints or
to imitate Moghul coins at their own mints, the latter course being
really forgery, as it was not till the middle of the eighteenth century
that the Great Moghul finally allowed them to issue coins freely in his
name (Plate X. 5, half-rupee of Murshidabad struck by the East India
Company in name of Shah Alam II. in 1768 A.D.). In 1641 the Company had
acquired a settlement at Fort St. George (Madras) and thenceforth issued
coins in imitation of the local currencies of the Coromandel coast
(Plate X. 3, gold star pagoda; Plate X. 1, silver fanam (_cf._ Plate VI.
5); Plate X. 4 is the later pagoda of European fabric issued at the end
of the eighteenth century). It was not till 1835 that the name of an
English king again appeared on the coins of the East India Company, when
a uniform coinage of English style was adopted for India (Plate X. 6,
quarter-rupee of William IV.). There has since been little change in the
type then adopted. In 1858 the name of the East India Company disappears
from the reverse, and in 1877 the proclamation of Queen Victoria as
Empress of India necessitated a change of title on the obverse (Plate X.
7, quarter-rupee of Victoria).

In 1796, the English occupied Ceylon, hitherto a Dutch possession, and
were confirmed in its possession by the treaty of Amiens in 1802. The
earlier coins were struck on the standard introduced by their
predecessors (Plate X. 8, a silver piece of 24 stivers). In 1836 the
English standard was adopted, and silver coins (three-halfpenny pieces)
and copper (half-farthings) issued till 1870, when the cent was adopted
as the standard coin (Plate X. 9, 25 cents (silver) of George V.).

The East India Company issued coins similar to their later Indian issues
for their possessions in the Malay Peninsula, and since 1867 there has
been a regular Imperial coinage (100 cents = one dollar) for the Straits
Settlements and also for Hong-Kong (Plate X. 10, 5 cents (silver) of
Edward VII.).

_Portuguese._--In 1510 Albuquerque captured Goa, which became the
capital of the Portuguese empire in the east, and increased in wealth
and commercial importance so rapidly that it became known as "Golden
Goa" (Goa Dourada). From the time of Albuquerque the Portuguese have
issued coins here, always with European types. Plate X. 11 is a _pardao_
or half-rupee of Maria struck at Goa in 1808, and is typical of the
coinage for nearly three centuries previous. Since 1881 the coins for
Goa, which is now all that is left of the Portuguese possessions in the
East, have been struck at the Bombay mint, and are uniform with those of
British India (Plate X. 12, quarter-rupee, 1885).

_Dutch, etc._--Towards the end of the sixteenth century the Dutch began
to dispute Portuguese supremacy in the East, and ultimately acquired
considerable possessions in the Malay Archipelago. An extensive coinage
was issued by the Dutch East India Company in Java in the eighteenth
century (Plate X. 13, gold rupee of Java, and X. 14, copper doit). The
latter coins of the Dutch territories in the East are similar to the
coins of Holland. Coins have also been struck for their Indian
possessions of France (Pondichery) and Denmark (Tranquebar) on local
standards but with European types.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.--J. Atkins, _Coins of the British Possessions and
Colonies_ (London, 1889); E. Thurston, _The Coinage of the East India
Company_ (Madras, 1890); G. da Cuñha, _Indo-Portuguese Numismatics_
(Bombay, 1880); J. A. van der Chijs, _De Munten van Nederlandsch Indië_
(Batavia, 1859).


  [Illustration: PLATE I.]

  [Illustration: PLATE II.]

  [Illustration: PLATE III.]

  [Illustration: PLATE IV.]

  [Illustration: PLATE V.]

  [Illustration: PLATE VI.]

  [Illustration: PLATE VII.]

  [Illustration: PLATE VIII.]

  [Illustration: PLATE IX.]

  [Illustration: PLATE X.]




     MAPS AND PLANS
     OF
     NOTABLE BATTLES, DISTRICTS, & TOWNS
     CONNECTED WITH
     THE HISTORY OF ASIA




PLANS

OF THE

FIVE CHIEF BATTLES

OF INDIA


  [Illustration: BATTLE OF
   SERINGAPATAM
   February 1792

   Bartholomew _Edinburgh_]

  [Illustration: BATTLE OF
   ASSAYE
   September 1803

   Bartholomew _Edinburgh_]

  [Illustration:BATTLE OF
   MEANEE
   February 1843

   Bartholomew _Edinburgh_]

  [Illustration: BATTLE OF
   ALIWAL
   January 1846

   Bartholomew _Edinburgh_]

  [Illustration: BATTLE OF
   SOBRAON
   February 1846

   Bartholomew _Edinburgh_]

  [Illustration:INDIAN MUTINY
   SHOWING DISTRIBUTION OF TROOPS
   May, 1857

   Bartholomew _Edinburgh_]

  [Illustration: ARYAN LANGUAGES OF INDIA

   Bartholomew _Edinburgh_]

  [Illustration: NON-ARYAN LANGUAGES OF INDIA

   Bartholomew _Edinburgh_]

  [Illustration: SITES OF
   ANCIENT INDIAN
   TEMPLES
   Bartholomew _Edinburgh_]

  [Illustration: MILITARY DIVISIONS
   OF INDIA

   Bartholomew _Edinburgh_]

  [Illustration: DELHI

   Bartholomew _Edinburgh_]

  [Illustration: LUCKNOW

   Bartholomew _Edinburgh_]

  [Illustration: CAWNPORE

   Bartholomew _Edinburgh_]

  [Illustration: LAHORE

   Bartholomew _Edinburgh_]

  [Illustration: RANGOON

   Bartholomew _Edinburgh_]

  [Illustration: LHASA
   "THE FORBIDDEN CITY"
   After Map by Major Ryder

   Bartholomew _Edinburgh_]




     A GAZETTEER
     OF
     TOWNS AND PLACES IN ASIA




A GAZETTEER OF TOWNS AND PLACES IN ASIA[1]


  [Footnote 1: _A large number of the places are not marked in
   the maps, but the latitude and longitude will enable the reader to
   locate their position._]


ABBREVIATIONS

     F. Founded.
     Res. Residence.
     Bp. Birthplace.
     Provs. Provinces.


=Abila=, Palestine. 33N. 36E. Traditional burial-place of Abel.

=Abohar=, Punjab. 30N. 74E. Said to have been f. by Jaura; visited by Ibn
Batuta, 1332.

=Aboo=, Rajputana. 25N. 73E. Contains famous Jain temple, the Vimla Sah,
f. in 1032.

=Abydos=, Asia Minor. 40N. 26E. Xerxes entered Europe, B.C. 480. Scene of
story of Hero and Leander. (See Byron's 'Bride of Abydos.')

=Acre=, Palestine. 33N. 35E. Taken by the Crusaders, 1104; retaken by
Saladin, 1187; recovered by Richard Coeur de Lion, 1191; surrendered
to Saracens, 1291; unsuccessfully besieged by Napoleon, 1799; stormed by
Ibrahim Pasha, 1832; bombarded by a combined English, Austrian, and
Turkish fleet, 1840. (See Scott's 'Talisman,' 'Travels of Marco Polo,'
Thomson's 'Land and the Book,' Volney's 'Voyage en Syrie et en Egypte.')

=Adalia=, Asiatic Turkey. 36N. 31E. Visited by Kinglake, who gives an
account of the city in 'Eothen.'

=Adam's Peak=, Ceylon. 7N. 80E. Supposed to contain tomb of Adam. (See
'Travels of Marco Polo.')

=Adas=, Bombay. 22N. 73E. Scene of Hamid Khan's victory over Rustam Ali,
1723; Mahrattas over Raghunath Rao Peshwa, 1775; British over Mahrattas,
1775.

=Aden=, Arabia. 13N. 45E. Taken from the Portuguese by Turks, 1538;
annexed to British India, 1839. (See 'Purchas His Pilgrimes,' 'Travels
of Marco Polo.')

=Adoni=, Madras. 16N. 77E. Seized by Sultan of Bijapur, 1568; by
Aurungzebe, 1686; unsuccessfully attacked by Hyder Ali, 1779; taken by
Tippoo Sahib, 1786; ceded to British, 1800.

=Agra=, United Provs. 27N. 78E. Contains palace of Shah Jehan, the Pearl
Mosque, and the Taj Mahal, and was the supposed scene of incarnation of
Vishnu. Capital of Mogul sovereigns, 1526-1658. Taken by British, 1803.
(See Sir Edwin Arnold's 'With Sa'di in the Garden,' Whittier's 'Miriam,'
'Purchas His Pilgrimes.')

=Ahar=, United Provs. 28N. 78E. Town from which Rukminí, wife of Krishna,
was said to have been taken.

=Ahmadabad= ('the abode of Ahmed'), Bombay. 23N. 73E. F. in 1412. Ancient
Mohammedan capital, famed for architectural relics. Taken by British,
1818.

=Ahmadnagar=, Bombay. 19N. 75E. F. by Ahmed Nuzam Shah, 1494. Taken by
General Wellesley, 1803.

=Aivalli=, Bombay. 16N. 76E. Contains famous temples, and is sacred spot
of Vishnu.

=Ajmere=, Rajputana. 26N. 75E. Capital of Ajmere-Merwara. Contains tomb of
Mussulman saint, Kwajah. Purchased by Britain, 1818. Mayo College f.
1875.

=Akashi=, Japan. 35N. 135E. Contains Shinto temple in honour of the poet
Kakinomoto-no-Hitomaro.

=Ak-su=, Eastern Turkestan. 41N. 81E. Nearly destroyed by earthquake,
1718. Captured by Khan of Kashgar, 1867; retaken by Chinese, 1877.

=Alandi=, Bombay. 19N. 74E. Resort of Hindu pilgrims, and said to have
been res. of Jnaneshvar.

=Aleppo=, Syria. 36N. 37E. Taken by Saracens, 636; conquered by Tamerlane,
1402; by Turks, 1517. Visited by earthquakes, 1170, 1822. Contains the
Jami Sakarya, or Great Mosque, in which lie alleged remains of
Zacharias, father of John the Baptist. Res. of Mutanabbi. (See Volney's
'Voyage en Syrie et en Egypte,' Hakluyt's 'Voyages,' Burckhardt's
'Travels in Syria and the Holy Land.')

=Aligarh=, United Provs. 28N. 78E. Contains Fort Aligarh, captured by
General Lake from Mahrattas, 1803. Seat of Mohammedan Anglo-Oriental
College.

=Allahabad= ('city of God'), United Provs. 25N. 82E. F. by Akbar, 1575.
Taken by Britain, 1801. Contains Muir Central College. Scene of
journeying of Rama and Sita described in the 'Ramayana' as the hermitage
of Bharadvaja.

=Allah Shehr=, Asia Minor. 38N. 29E. F. by Attalus Philadelphus, c. 200
B.C.; supposed to be one of 'seven churches of Asia' mentioned in
Apocalypse.

=Amarapura= ('city of the gods'), Burma. 22N. 96E. Former capital of
Burma. F. in 1783, by Bodawpaya. Destroyed by fire, 1810; by earthquake,
1839. Contains celebrated temple with colossal bronze statue of Gautama.

=Amasia=, Asiatic Turkey. 41N. 36E. Former capital of kings of Pontus. Bp.
of Strabo.

=Ambur=, Madras. 13N. 79E. Muzaffar Jang conquered Anwar-ud-din, Nawab of
Arcot, 1749.

=Amoy= ('gallery gate'), China. 24N. 118E. Taken by Britain, 1841; opened
to foreign trade by Treaty of Nanking, 1842.

=Amritsar= ('pool of immortality'), Punjab. 32N. 75E. F. round sacred
reservoir by Guru Ram Das, 1574. Contains Darbar Sahib, chief Sikh
temple; also fortress of Govindgarh, 1809.

=Amroha=, United Provs. 29N. 78E. Said to have been f. by Hastinapur; res.
of Shah Wilayat. In the vicinity the Mongols were conquered, 1304.

=Amu Daria=, Turkestan. 37N. 73E. Ancient river Oxus, occurring as Amoo in
'The Veiled Prophet of Khorassan.' (See Moore's 'Lalla Rookh.')

=Anantapur=, Madras. 15N. 78E. F. by Chikkappa Udaiyar, 1364; attacked by
Mahrattas, 1757.

=Aneysa=, Arabia. 26N. 45E. Bp. of Abdul-Wahab, founder of Wahabis. (See
Doughty's 'Travels in Arabia Deserta.')

=Angkor=, Indo-China. 13N. 104E. Ruined city, near which are ruins of
Angkor-Vat, a famous Cambodian temple. (See Little's 'Far East.')

=Angora=, Asiatic Turkey. 40N. 33E. Supposed to have been f. by Midas.
Scene of Christian Councils, 314, 358. Contains temple erected to
Augustus. Sultan Bejazet I. captured by Tamerlane, 1402.

=Ani=, Asiatic Turkey. 41N. 43E. Ancient Armenian capital. Taken by
Greeks, 1045; by Seljuks, 1064. Destroyed by earthquake, 1319.

=Anjangaon=, Berar. 21N. 77E. Treaty signed between British and Daulat Rao
Sindhia after second Mahratta War, 1803.

=Anjengo=, Madras. 9N. 77E. Bp. of historian, Robert Orme, and res. of
Eliza Draper, friend of Laurence Sterne.

=Anjidiv=, Bombay. 15N. 74E. Island visited by Ibn Batatu, 1342; by Vasco
da Gama, 1498. Occupied by Portuguese, 1505. Mentioned by Ptolemy.

=Ankai Tonkai=, Bombay. 20N. 74E. Conquered by Shah Jehan, 1635; occupied
by British, 1818.

=Antioch=, Syria. 36N. 36E. F. by Seleucus Nicator, c. 300 B.C. Scene of
St. Paul's first ministry. Destroyed by earthquakes, 526, 1872. Ruined
by Persians, 538; taken by Saracens, 658; by Turks, 1516. Bp. of
Archias, St. Luke, and Chrysostom. (See Volney's 'Voyage en Syrie et en
Egypte.')

=An-tung=, Manchuria. 40N. 125E. General Kuroki established here during
Russo-Japanese War, 1904-1905. (See McKenzie's 'From Tokyo to Tiflis.')

=Anupshahr=, United Provs. 28N. 78E. Occupied by Ahmad Shah Durrani, 1757;
by British, 1773.

=Arafat= ('the mountain of mercy'), Arabia. 21N. 40E. Mountain on which
Adam and Eve are alleged to have met after the fall. Scene of many
Mohammedan pilgrimages. (See Burton's 'Pilgrimage to Al-Madinah and
Meccah,' Burckhardt's 'Travels in Arabia.')

=Arantangi=, Madras. 10N. 79E. Seized by Raghunatha Levan, c. 1646, 1698.

=Ararat=, Asiatic Turkey. 40N. 44E. One of mountains in Asia on which
Noah's ark is said to have rested. Parrot first ascended Great Ararat,
1829. Severe earthquake experienced, 1840. (See 'Travels of Marco
Polo.')

=Arcot= ('six deserts'), Madras. 13N. 79E. Contains ruins of Nawab's
palace. Mentioned by Ptolemy. Clive defended city successfully against
siege, 1751.

=Ardahan=, Asiatic Turkey. 41N. 43E. Successfully stormed by Russians,
1877; ceded to Russia by Turkey, 1878.

=Argaum=, Berar. 21N. 77E. Mahrattas defeated by Wellesley, 1803.

=Arginusæ Is.=, off W. coast of Asia Minor. 39N. 27E. Spartan fleet
defeated by Athenians near these islands, 406 B.C.

=Arjesh=, Turkish Armenia. 39N. 43E. Taken by Jelal-ed-Din, 1228.
Destroyed by earthquake, 1246.

=Arni=, Madras. 13N. 79E. Clive defeated Raja Sahib and French forces,
1751.

=Aror=, Bombay. 28N. 69E. Captured by Mohammedans, c. 712.

=Arpad=, Syria. 37N. 37E. Taken by Tiglath Pileser II., 740 B.C.

=Arrah=, Bengal. 26N. 85E. In Indian Mutiny 12 Englishmen and 50 Sikhs
held out against 3000 Sepoys for 8 days, 1857.

=Artaxata=, Russian Armenia. 39N. 45E. Ancient capital of Armenia, now in
ruins. Hannibal supposed to have superintended building of city; named
after Artaxis I., c. 180 B.C. Destroyed by Romans, 58; by Persians, 370.
Joseph, the patriarch, presided over ecclesiastical council, 450.

=Ashdod=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Captured by Jonathan, 147 B.C. Mentioned by
Herodotus. Contained famous temple of Dagon. (See Thomson's 'Land and
the Book.')

=Ashta=, Central India. 23N. 77E. Contains fort built by Dost Mohammed
Khan, 1716; captured by Mahrattas, 1745; stormed by Kudsia Begam, 1837.

=Ashta=, Bombay. 18N. 75E. British defeated Baji Rao Peshwa, 1818.

=Asirgarh=, Central Provs. 21N. 76E. Massacre of garrison by Ala-ud-din
Khilji, 1295; captured by Akbar, 1600; by General Wellesley, 1803;
besieged by British, 1819.

=Askelon=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Ancient seat of worship of Astarte, and of
Dagon and Dercetis, whose temple was plundered by Scythians, 630 B.C.
Bp. of Herod I., who embellished it. Godfrey de Bouillon defeated
Egyptians, 1099; city taken by Crusaders, 1153; by Saladin, 1187;
destroyed by Sultan Bibars, 1270. (See Scott's 'The Talisman.')

=Assaye=, Haidarabad. 20N. 76E. Mahrattas conquered by Sir Arthur
Wellesley, 1803. (See Malleson's 'Decisive Battles of India.')

=Athni=, Bombay. 17N. 75E. Visited by French traveller Mandelslo, 1639.
Yielded to Rajah Sahu of Satara, 1730; British possession, 1839.

=Atrauli=, N.W. Provs. 28N. 78E. Held for three months by Mohammedans
during Mutiny, 1857.

=Attock=, Punjab. 34N. 72E. Contains fort built by Akbar, 1581; captured
by Ranjit Singh, 1812.

=Augur=, Central India. 24N. 76E. F. by Agra Bhil; destroyed by Bapuji
Sindhia, 1801; suffered during Mutiny, 1857.

=Aurangabad= ('the abode of Aurungzebe'), Haidarabad. 20N. 75E. F. in
1620. Contains Buddhist caves, and mausoleum built by Aurungzebe in
memory of his daughter.

=Ava= ('a fish-pond'), Burma. 22N. 96E. F. by Thadominpaya, 1364. Former
capital of Burma. Ruined by earthquake, 1839.

=Ayodhya=, United Provs. 27N. 82E. Famous in legend as city of Dasa-ratha,
father of Rama. (See 'Ramayana.')

=Ayuthia=, Siam. 14N. 101E. Founded in 1351; capital of Siam until nearly
destroyed by Burmese, 1767. Chief ruin is a Buddhist temple, the 'Golden
Mount.' (See Little's 'Far East.')


=Baalbek= ('city of Baal'), Syria. 34N. 36E. Contains Temple of the Sun,
built by Antoninus Pius. Taken by Arabs, 748; by Tamerlane, 1400.
Destroyed by earthquake, 1170, 1750. (See Twain's 'New Pilgrim's
Progress,' Lamartine's 'Voyage en Orient,' Moore's 'Lalla Rookh,'
Volney's 'Voyage en Syrie et en Egypte,' Burckhardt's 'Travels in Syria
and the Holy Land.')

=Babylon= ('the gate of the god'), Asiatic Turkey. 33N. 45E. First
mentioned, 3800 B.C.; capital of Babylonia, c. 2300 B.C. Destroyed by
Sennacherib, 689 B.C.; attained eminence under Nabopolassar, 625-604
B.C.; under Nebuchadnezzar, 604-561 B.C. Surrendered to Cyrus, 539 B.C.
Alexander the Great died in palace of Nebuchadnezzar, 323 B.C. (See
'Purchas His Pilgrimes,' Hakluyt's 'Voyages.')

=Badami=, Bombay. 16N. 76E. Contains famous cave-temple, f. 650. Captured
by General Munro, 1818; by Arabs, 1840.

=Badarpur=, Bengal. 25N. 93E. British defeated Burmese, 1824.

=Badnera=, Berar. 21N. 78E. Partially destroyed by Rajah Ram, 1822.

=Bagalkot=, Bombay. 16N. 76E. Captured by Peshwa of Savanur, 1775; by
Hyder Ali, 1778; by General Munro, 1818.

=Baghdad=, Asiatic Turkey. 33N. 44E. F. by Caliph Al-Mansur, c. 762;
embellished by Harun-al-Rashid; taken by Hulaku Khan, 1258; by
Tamerlane, 1393; by Amurath IV., 1638. Contains tomb of Zobeida, wife of
Harun-al-Rashid, and is famous by means of the 'Arabian Nights.' (See
Firdausi's 'Sha Name,' Gosse's 'Firdausi in Exile,' 'Purchas His
Pilgrimes,' 'Travels of Marco Polo.')

=Baghput=, Punjab. 29N. 77E. Said to be the Vyaghraprastha mentioned in
the 'Mahabharata.'

=Bahera=, Punjab. 32N. 73E. Captured by Babar, 1519; pillaged by
Nur-ud-din, 1757.

=Bahraich=, United Provs. 28N. 82E. Contains tomb of Mohammedan saint,
Masaud.

=Baj-Baj=, Bengal. 22N. 88E. Fort captured by Clive from Siraj-ud-daula,
1756.

=Bajwara=, Punjab. 32N. 76E. Rajah Sansar Chand conquered Sirdar Bhup
Singh, 1801; fort captured by Ranjit Singh, 1825.

=Balkh=, Afghan Turkestan. 37N. 67E. Zoroaster first preached his
doctrine, 549 B.C.; died at Balkh. Visited by Chinese explorer, Fa Hian,
402; Hiouen Thsang, 643; by Marco Polo, 1263. Besieged and taken by
Ninus, 1933 B.C.; pillaged by Genghis Khan, 1221; destroyed by
Tamerlane, 1390. (See 'Travels of Marco Polo.')

=Bamian=, Afghanistan. 35N. 68E. Destroyed by Genghis Khan, 1221.

=Bander Abbas= ('harbour of Abbas'), Persia. 27N. 56E. Ancient Harmozia.
Portuguese driven out by Shah Abbas the Great with help of British,
1623. (See Moore's 'Lalla Rookh,' story of 'The Fire-Worshippers.')

=Bandhogarh=, Central India. 24N. 81E. Attacked by Asaf Khan, 1563;
captured by Patr Das, 1597; yielded to Anup Singh, 1658. Said to be bp.
of Akbar.

=Banera=, Rajputana. 26N. 75E. Conquered by Akbar, 1567; fort built in
1726; captured by Rajah of Shahpura, c. 1756.

=Bangalore=, Mysore. 13N. 78E. F. by Hyder Ali, 1537. Taken by Lord
Cornwallis, 1791. Contains palace of Tippoo Sahib, and Central College.

=Bangkok=, Siam. 14N. 101E. Ceded to Louis XIV., 1687; became royal
residence, 1767. Contains famous temples, and a colossal statue of
Buddha. (See Little's 'Far East.')

=Banias=, Syria. 33N. 36E. Visited by W. M. Thomson, and described in 'The
Land and the Book.'

=Bankapur=, Bombay. 15N. 76E. First mentioned, 898. Stormed by Firoz Shah,
1406; conquered by Hyder Ali, 1776; ceded to British, 1802.

=Bantam=, East Indies. 6S. 106E. Described in first part of 'Purchas His
Pilgrimes' as celebrated town of Java.

=Baragaon=, Bengal. 25N. 85E. Visited by Hiuen Tsiang, who here studied
religion.

=Bardwan=, Bengal. 23N. 88E. Scene of the third story of the vampire in
Burton's 'Vikram and the Vampire.'

=Bareilly=, United Provs. 28N. 79E. New town f. by Rajah Makrand-Mughals,
1657. Taken by English, 1801; Europeans massacred during Mutiny, 1857;
recaptured by Sir Colin Campbell, 1858.

=Baroda=, Bombay, 22N. 73E. Tributary to Great Britain, 1802; Malhar Rao
succeeded Sayaji Rao III., 1875.

=Barpeta=, Bengal. 26N. 91E. Sankar Deb, follower of Vishnu, here f. a
religious college. Partially destroyed by earthquake, 1897.

=Barrackpur=, Bengal. 23N. 88E. Prominent town in Sepoy mutinies, 1824,
1857. Contains Lady Canning's tomb.

=Barsana=, United Provs. 28N. 77E. Fabled to be a res. of Radha, mistress
of Kishna. Pillaged by imperial troops, 1774.

=Barwani=, Central India. 22N. 75E. Said to have been f. by Rana Chandra
Singh, c. 1650. Near town is sacred hill of Jains, and temple with
inscription dating from 1166.

=Basarh=, Bengal. 26N. 85E. Visited by Buddha, and sacred town of
Buddhists. Visited by explorers Fa Hian and Hieun Tsiang.

=Basavapatna=, Mysore. 14N. 76E. Captured by Bijapurs, 1637; destroyed by
Hyder Ali, 1763; plundered by Mahrattas, 1791. Ancient res. of Baba
Budan.

=Basra= ('fortress'), Asiatic Turkey. 30N. 48E. F. under Omar, 656.
Contains tomb of Zobeir. (See 'Travels of Marco Polo.')

=Bassein=, Bombay. 19N. 73E. Ceded to Portuguese, 1534; taken by
Mahrattas, 1765; by British, 1780.

=Batala=, Punjab. 32N. 75E. F. by Rai Ram Deo, c. 1465. Contains tomb of
Shamsher Khan, foster-brother of Akbar.

=Batavia= ('good land'), East Indies. 6S. 107E. First European settlement
f. by Pieter Both, 1610; new city f. by Jean Koen, 1621. Unsuccessfully
besieged by Kings of Bantam and Jacantra, 1619. Earthquake experienced,
1699.

=Bayana=, Punjab. 26N. 77E. Contains temple with inscription dated 1043.
Fort near captured by Mohammed Ghori, 1196; by Sikanda Lodi, 1492; by
Humayun, 1535.

=Bayazid=, Turkish Armenia. 39N. 44E. Captured by Russians, 1828, 1854,
1877. Yielded to Turkey by Treaty of Berlin, 1878.

=Bednore= ('bamboo city'), Mysore. 14N. 75E. Capital of Rajah of Ikari,
1645. Taken by Hyder Ali, 1763; by General Matthews, 1783; by Tippoo
Sahib, 1784.

=Beer-Sheba= ('well of the oath'), Palestine. 31N. 35E. Only ruins remain
of ancient city famous in Biblical history from time of Abraham's
digging a well and planting a grove.

=Begampur=, Bombay. 18N. 76E. Contains tomb of daughter of Aurungzebe.

=Behar= ('monastery'), Bengal. 25N. 86E. Famous as ancient centre of
Buddhism, and as city in which Buddha preached.

=Behistun= ('place of the gods'), Persia. 34N. 47E. Rock on which
cuneiform inscriptions recounting deeds of Darius I. are engraved;
discovered by Sir Henry Rawlinson, 1835.

=Beit Jibrin=, Syria. 32N. 35E. Visited by W. M. Thomson, and described in
'The Land and the Book.'

=Bela=, Baluchistan. 26N. 66E. Contains tomb of Sir Robert Sandeman.

=Belgaum=, Bombay. 16N. 75E. Taken by Aurungzebe, 1686; by Hyder Ali,
1776; by British, 1818.

=Bellary=, Madras. 15N. 77E. Captured by Sivaji, the Mahratta, c. 1678;
ceded to British, 1800.

=Benares= ('the splendid'), N.W. Provs. 25N. 83E. Visited by Hsuan Tsang
in 7th century A.D. Religious capital of India, containing many temples.
Taken by Sultan Mahmoud, 1190; ceded to England, 1775; outbreak during
Indian Mutiny, 1857. (See Sir Edwin Arnold's 'Light of Asia,' Burton's
'Vikram and the Vampire.')

=Bencoolen=, Sumatra. 4S. 102E. F. by British, 1685; Fort Marlborough
built, 1714. Formerly chief British possession in Sumatra; ceded to
Holland in exchange for Malacca, 1824.

=Bendemeer=, Persia. 30N. 52E. (See Thos. Moore's 'Lalla Rookh,' story of
the 'Veiled Prophet of Khorassan.')

=Berasia=, Central India. 24N. 77E. Contains tomb of his father built by
Dost Mohammed.

=Berea=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Battle fought in which Judas Maccabæus was
killed, 161 B.C.

=Berezov=, Siberia. 64N. 65E. F. in 1593. Partially burnt, 1719, 1808.
Prince Menshikov died in exile, 1729; Prince Dolgoruki, 1730. General
Ostermann exiled, 1742; died, 1747.

=Berghama=, Asiatic Turkey. 39N. 27E. Ancient capital of Pergamus, and
contains many magnificent ruins; bequeathed to Romans by Attalus III.,
133 B.C. Bp. of Galen and Apollodorus.

=Berhampur=, Bengal. 24N. 88E. Indian Mutiny originated here, 1857.

=Besika=, Asia Minor. 40N. 26E. Bay used as station for British fleet,
1853-1854, 1877-1878.

=Bethany=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Frequently mentioned in the Bible as the
house of Lazarus, Martha and Mary, Simon the leper. Contains alleged
tomb of Lazarus, and village is now called 'El-Azariyeh,' the 'Place of
Lazarus.'

=Bethel= ('house of God'), Palestine. 32N. 35E. Supposed to have been f.
by Abraham or Jacob. Rachel and Deborah died at Bethel.

=Beth-horon= ('place of caves'), Palestine. 32N. 35E. The Syrians under
Prince Sorom vanquished by Judas Maccabæus.

=Bethlehem= ('house of bread'), Palestine. 33N. 35E. Bp. of David and of
Christ. Devastated by Hadrian, 132. Contains Church of the Nativity
built by Constantine; enlarged by Justinian; embellished by Manuel
Comnenus, 1170; by Edward IV. and Philip of Burgundy, 1482. Burial-place
of Jerome. (See Kinglake's 'Eothen,' Twain's 'New Pilgrim's Progress,'
Lamartine's 'Voyage en Orient,' 'Purchas His Pilgrimes,' Thomson's 'Land
and the Book.')

=Beyrout=, Syria. 34N. 35E. Destroyed by Tryphon, 140 B.C.; taken by
Arabs, 635; by Baldwin, 1111; re-captured by Saladin, 1187; by Turks,
1763. Lamartine's only daughter died here, 1832. (See Kinglake's
'Eothen,' Burton's 'Wanderings in Three Continents,' Lamartine's 'Voyage
en Orient,' Thomson's 'Land and the Book,' Volney's 'Voyage en Syrie et
en Egypte.')

=Bhadaur=, Punjab. 30N. 75E. F. by Sirdar Dunna Singh, 1718; res. of
Bhadaur chiefs.

=Bhagalpur=, Bengal. 25N. 87E. Contains famous Jain temples, and native
monument to Augustus Cleveland.

=Bhagwangola=, Bengal. 24N. 88E. Unsuccessfully besieged by Mahrattas,
1743; burnt by Mahrattas, 1750. Temporary res. of Surajah Dowlah.

=Bhainsrorgarh=, Rajputana. 25N. 76E. Said to have been f. by Bhainsa Sah;
captured by Ala-ud-din, c. 1303.

=Bhanpura=, Rajputana. 25N. 76E. Res. and burial-place of Jaswant Rao
Holkar.

=Bhartpur= ('city of Bhurat'), Rajputana. 27N. 78E. Unsuccessfully stormed
by Lord Lake, 1805; taken by Lord Combermere, 1826. Under British
administration, 1853. (See Malleson's 'Decisive Battles of India.')

=Bhatner=, Punjab. 30N. 74E. Captured and partially destroyed by
Tamerlane, 1398.

=Bhilsa=, Rajputana. 24N. 78E. Contains mosques built by Akbar, 1583; by
Aurungzebe, 1682. Plundered by Altamsh, 1235; seized by Ala-ud-din,
1290.

=Bhojpur=, Bombay. 19N. 74E. Contains stones bearing ancient carvings and
inscription dating from c. 200 B.C.

=Bhubaneswar=, Bengal. 20N. 86E. Sacred city of the followers of Siva; of
great antiquity.

=Bhuj=, Bombay. 23N. 70E. Taken by storm by Sir William Kier, 1819.

=Bidar=, Haidarabad. 18N. 78E. Captured by Ulugh Khan, 1321; by
Aurungzebe, 1656.

=Biderra=, Bengal. 23N. 88E. Colonel Forde conquered Dutch under Colonel
Roussel, 1759. (See Malleson's 'Decisive Battles of India.')

=Bijanagur= ('city of triumph'), Madras. 16N. 77E. F. in 1336; destroyed
by Mohammedan kings, 1564. Contains temples made of granite.

=Bijapur= ('city of victory'), Bombay. 17N. 76E. Taken by Aurungzebe,
1686; given to Rajah of Satara by British, 1818.

=Bilsa=, Bengal. 24N. 88E. Remarkable Buddhist remains discovered by
English travellers, 1822; contains tomb of Mussulman, Djelal-ed-din
Bhokhary.

=Bimlipatam=, Madras. 18N. 83E. Captured by Mahrattas, 1754; ceded to
British by Dutch, 1825.

=Bindraban=, Bengal. 26N. 88E. Krishna is supposed to have passed his
childhood here, and several temples are erected in his honour.

=Birsinha=, Bengal. 23N. 88E. Bp. of Iswar Chandra Vidyasagar, writer of
'Sitar Banabas.'

=Bisauli=, United Provs. 28N. 79E. Res. and burial-place of Dunde Khan.

=Bithur=, United Provs. 27N. 80E. One of chief centres of worship of
Brahma. Nana Sahib here defeated by Havelock during Mutiny, 1857.

=Bitlis=, Asiatic Turkey. 38N. 42E. Supposed to have been f. by Alexander
the Great. Taken by Arabs, 648. Scene of defeat of Solyman by Persians,
1554.

=Blagovieshtchensk= ('city of the annunciation'), Siberia. 50N. 146E. F.
in 1856; capital of Amur district, 1858. Attacked unsuccessfully by
Chinese, 1900. (See Fraser's 'Real Siberia.')

=Boca Tigris= ('the tiger's mouth'), China. 23N. 114E. Entrance to the
Canton river, containing fortified islands taken by British, 1841,
1856.

=Bodinayakkanur=, Madras. 10N. 77E. Captured by Hyder Ali, 1776.

=Bokhara= ('a church'), Turkestan. 40N. 65E. Burnt by Djenghis-Khan, 1221.
Contains 360 mosques and many colleges. Scene of youth of Zelica and
Azim in Moore's 'Lalla Rookh.'

=Bombay=, Bombay. 19N. 73E. Ceded to Portugal, 1530; part of
marriage-portion of Catherine of Portugal, 1661; British established
themselves here, 1666.

=Borsad=, Bombay. 22N. 73E. Res. of Rangoji, 1741; here made prisoner,
1748.

=Botad=, Bombay. 22N. 72E. Town near which is tomb of Pir Hamir Khan,
Mussulman saint.

=Brahmakund=, Bengal. 28N. 96E. Pool which was the scene of an incident in
which Parasu Rama, an incarnation of Vishnu, took part.

=Brahmapuri=, Bombay. 18N. 76E. Res. of Aurungzebe from 1695 to 1700.

=Brahmini=, Bengal. 21N. 86E. Famous as scene of wooing of Matsya Gandha,
mother of alleged compiler of 'Mahabharata' and the Vedas.

=Broach=, Bombay. 22N. 73E. Captured by British, 1772; ceded to Scindia,
1783; re-captured by British, 1803.

=Brusa=, Asiatic Turkey. 40N. 29E. Former capital of Bithynia. F. by
Prusus II., King of Bithynia. Captured by Sultan Orkhan of Turkey, 1326;
plundered by Tartars, 1402; suffered from earthquakes, 1855.

=Budaun=, United Provs. 28N. 78E. Supposed to have been f. c. 905. Seized
by Kutb-ud-din, 1196; joined in Mutiny, 1857. Res. of Ala-ud-din.

=Buddha-Gaya=, Bengal. 25N. 85E. Formerly centre of worship of Buddha, and
contains sacred pipal-tree under which Sakyamuni reached Buddhahood.
Visited by Hieun Tsiang, 635.

=Budihaul=, Madras. 14N. 76E. Captured by Hyder Ali, 1761; by Mahrattas,
1771, 1790.

=Budrum=, Asiatic Turkey. 37N. 27E. F. on site of ancient Halicarnassus.
Contains a fortress built by the knights of Rhodes, 1402. Bp. of
Herodotus and Dionysius.

=Burhanpur=, Central Provs. 21N. 76E. F. by Nasir Khan, c. 1400; adorned
by Akbar, 1600. Pillaged by Mahrattas, 1685; captured by Wellesley,
1803.

=Buxar=, Bengal. 26N. 84E. Mir Kasim defeated by Sir Hector Munro, 1764.
Of literary interest as res. of writers of Vedic hymns.


=Cæsarea=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. F. by Herod the Great on site of Strato's
Tower. Famous in biblical history as city in which St. Peter preached to
Cornelius, and St. Paul was incarcerated for two years. Vespasian became
emperor, 69; Eusebius was bishop, 315-318; captured by Crusaders but
regained by Saladin, 1101; destroyed by Sultan Bibars, 1265. (See
Lamartine's 'Voyage en Orient,' Thomson's 'Land and the Book.')

=Calah=, Asiatic Turkey. 36N. 43E. One of ancient capitals of Assyria; f.
by Shalmaneser I., c. 1300 B.C.; rebuilt by Asurnazirpal, 880 B.C. Ruins
discovered by Sir A. H. Layard, 1845.

=Calcutta=, Bengal. 23N. 88E. F. by Governor Job Charnock, 1686; Fort
William established, 1696; besieged by Surajah Dowlah, Nawab of Bengal,
and captives imprisoned in the 'Black Hole,' 1756; recaptured by Clive,
1757; chief seat of British government, 1773. (See Kipling's 'City of
Dreadful Night.')

=Calicut=, Madras. 11N. 76E. Covilham landed here, 1486; Vasco da Gama,
1498; Captain Keeling, 1615. Don Fernando Coutinho repulsed, 1509;
devastated by Hyder Ali, 1765; taken by British, 1782; by Tippoo Sahib,
1788; re-taken by British, 1790. (See Burton's 'Goa and the Blue
Mountains,' also 'Purchas His Pilgrimes.')

=Cambay=, Bombay. 22N. 73E. Taken by General Goddard, 1780; given to
Mahrattas, 1783; ceded to British, 1803. (See Hakluyt's 'Voyages.')

=Cana=, Palestine. 33N. 35E. Famous in biblical history as scene of
Christ's first miracle. Bp. of his disciple Simon.

=Cannanore=, Madras. 12N. 75E. Visited by Vasco de Gama, 1498.

=Canton=, China. 23N. 113E. Bogue forts captured by British, 1841; city
occupied by French and British forces, 1857. (See Little's 'Far East,'
Kipling's 'From Sea to Sea.')

=Capernaum= ('village of Nahum'), Palestine. 33N. 36E. City in which
Christ resided, and performed many miracles; home of St. Matthew. (See
Thomson's 'Land and the Book.')

=Carchemish=, Asiatic Turkey. 37N. 38E. Captured by Tiglath-pileser I., c.
1120 B.C.; Josiah killed by Necho II. of Egypt, 609 B.C.; Necho
vanquished by Nebuchadnezzar, 605 B.C.

=Carmel=, Palestine. 33N. 35E. Mountain on which Elijah slaughtered the
priests of Baal. Napoleon used one of the monasteries situated here as
a hospital, 1799. Visited by Lamartine, 1832.

=Cawnpur= ('city of Krishna'), United Provs. 26N. 80E. Scene of the
massacre of Europeans by Nana Sahib during Mutiny, 1857. (See
Trevelyan's 'Cawnpore.')

=Cayster=, Asia Minor. 38N. 28E. River made famous by Virgil in the
'Georgics' and Ovid in the 'Metamorphoses.' Remains of Ephesus are near
its mouth.

=Celebes=, Malay Archipelago. 4S. 121E. Discovered by Portuguese, 1512;
established fort at Macassar, 1525; driven out by Dutch, 1660; taken by
British, but yielded to Dutch, 1814.

=Ceylon=, Indian Ocean. 8N. 81E. Visited by Portuguese, 1505; driven from
island by Dutch, 1658; ceded to Britain by Treaty of Amiens, 1802;
annexed, 1815.

=Chakan=, Bombay. 19N. 74E. Captured by Malik Ahmad, 1486; by Shaista
Khan, 1662; by Lieut.-Col. Deacon, 1818.

=Chakdaha=, Bengal. 23N. 89E. Bp. of Karta Baba, who f. the Kartabhaja
sect.

=Champaner=, Bombay. 22N. 74E. Taken by Mahmoud Begara, 1484; plundered by
Humayun, 1535.

=Chanar=, United Provs. 25N. 83E. Supposed to have been f. by Bhartrinath.
Taken by Humayun, 1537; by Akbar, 1575; attempted seizure by Major
Munro, 1763. Near fort is tomb of Saint Shah Kasim Sulaimani.

=Chandaur=, Bombay. 20N. 74E. Taken by the Mogols, 1635; by Aurungzebe,
1665; by Colonel Wallace, 1804; British possession, 1818.

=Chanderi=, Central India. 25N. 78E. Seized by Ghiyas-ud-din, 1251; by
Mahmoud Khilji I., 1438; by Jean Baptiste Filose, 1811; by Sir Hugh
Rose, 1858.

=Chandernagore= ('city of the moon'), Bengal. 23N. 88E. Ceded to French by
Aurungzebe, 1688; taken by British, 1757; restored to French, 1816.

=Chandragiri=, Madras. 14N. 79E. Said to have been f. by Immadi Narashima
Yadava Rayalu, 1000. Res. of deposed Vijayanagar kings. Conquered by
Hyder Ali, 1782.

=Charsadda=, Punjab. 34N. 72E. Mentioned by Ptolemy and Arrian; visited by
Hieun Tsiang.

=Chaul=, Bombay. 19N. 73E. Occupied by Portuguese, 1516; pillaged by
Gujerat troops, 1529; Ahmadnagar army defeated by Portuguese, 1594;
taken by Mahrattas, 1740.

=Chemulpo=, Korea. 37N. 127E. In Russian-Japanese war, Russians defeated
by Admiral Urin, 1904. (See McKenzie's 'From Tokyo to Tiflis.')

=Chengalput=, Madras. 13N. 80E. Said to have been f. by Timmarajah.
Captured by French, 1751; by Clive, 1752; place of refuge of British
troops, 1780.

=Chetwai=, Madras. 11N. 76E. Occupied by Dutch, 1717; taken by Hyder Ali,
1776; British possession, 1790.

=Chhapia=, United Provs. 27N. 82E. Bp. of Swami Narayan, incarnation of
Krishna.

=Chidambaram= ('the atmosphere of wisdom'), Madras. 11N. 80E. Taken by
French, 1753; unsuccessfully attacked by British, 1759; captured by
Major Monson, 1760; unsuccessfully attacked by Sir Eyre Coote, 1781.

=Chi-fu=, China. 38N. 122E. Convention held between Sir Thomas Wade and Li
Hung Chang, 1876; meeting-place of blockade runners, 1904-5.

=Chiknayakanhilli=, Madras. 13N. 77E. Pillaged by Mahrattas, 1791.
Burial-place of Dodda Deva Rajah.

=Chillianwallah=, Punjab. 33N. 74E. Sikhs defeated in doubtful battle by
Lord Gough, 1849. (See Malleson's 'Decisive Battles of India.')

=Chinchvad=, Bombay. 19N. 74E. Res. of Moroba, incarnation of Ganpati, and
scene of his miracles.

=Chin-Kiang=, China. 35N. 108E. Partially destroyed by Tai-pings, 1853.

=Chinsurah=, Bengal. 23N. 88E. F. by Dutch, 1656; routed by British under
Colonel Forde, 1758; occupied by British, 1795; restored to Dutch, 1814;
ceded to British, 1825.

=Chitakul=, Bombay. 15N. 74E. Captured by Portuguese, 1752; by Fazl-ullah
Khan, 1763.

=Chitrakut=, United Provs. 25N. 81E. Mentioned in the 'Ramayana' as scene
of wanderings of Rama and Sita, and here they were sought out by Bharat.

=Chittagong=, Burma. 22N. 92E. Visited by Portuguese, 1618; belonged to
Mogol empire, 1666; taken by British, 1760.

=Chupni=, Bengal. 25N. 92E. Bp. of Akhay Kumar Datta, prose-writer of
Bengal.

=Cnidus=, Asia Minor. 37N. 27E. Supposed to have been f. by Triopas.
Famous for the worship of Venus. Near the coast of Cnidus Conon defeated
the Spartan fleet, 314 B.C. Bp. of Eudoxus, Ctesias, and Sostratus.

=Cochin=, Madras. 10N. 76E. Taken from the Portuguese by Dutch, 1633;
captured by British, 1795; ceded by treaty to British, 1814. Visited by
Vasco da Gama, 1502; by St. Francis Xavier, 1530. (See Hakluyt's
'Voyages.')

=Coimbatore=, Madras. 11N. 77E. Taken by British from Tippoo Sahib, 1799.

=Colgong=, Bengal. 25N. 87E. Death of Ghiyas-ud-din Mahmoud, last king of
Bengal, took place here, 1539.

=Colombo=, Ceylon. 7N. 80E. Taken by Portuguese, 1517; ousted by Dutch,
1603; conquered by British, 1796.

=Colophon=, Asia Minor. 38N. 27E. Supposed to have been f. by Andracmon of
Pylos or by Mopsus. Bp. of Homer, Mimnermus, and Nicander.

=Colossæ=, Asia Minor. 38N. 29E. Now represented by Khonas, bp. of Nicetas
Khoniates. Mentioned by Xenophon and Herodotus. St. Paul sent a letter
to its church during his imprisonment at Rome.

=Conjeveram=, Madras. 13N. 80E. Captured by Mussulmans, 1310, 1646; by
Mahrattas, 1677; by Clive, 1752; burnt by French, 1757.

=Coringa=, Madras. 17N. 82E. Became British possession, 1759. Inundated
and partially destroyed by ocean, 1787, 1832.

=Cossimbazar=, Bengal. 24N. 88E. British defeated by Surajah Dowlah, 1757.
Contains tomb of first wife of Warren Hastings.

=Covelong=, Madras. 13N. 80E. Captured by French, 1750; by Clive, 1752.

=Cranganore=, Madras. 10N. 76E. Fortress erected by Portuguese, 1505;
ceded to Dutch, 1660; sold to Rajah of Travancore.

=Cunaxa=, Asiatic Turkey. 33N. 44E. Cyrus the Younger killed here in a
battle with his brother, Artaxerxes Mnemon, 401 B.C.

=Cydnus=, Asia Minor. 37N. 35E. River up which Cleopatra sailed to meet
Antony.

=Cyprus=, Asiatic Turkey. 35N. 33E. Seat of worship of Aphrodite; bp. of
Barnabas. Conquered by Arabs, 646; retaken by Greeks, 648; secured by
Haroun-al-Raschid, 802; by Comnenus, 1184; ruled by Guy de Lusignan,
1193; occupied by Turks, 1570; ruled by British, 1878. (See Kinglake's
'Eothen,' Hakluyt's 'Voyages.')


=Dafar=, Arabia. 17N. 54E. Described in 'Travels of Marco Polo' as Dulfar.

=Damalcheruvu Pass=, Madras. 13N. 79E. Mahrattas defeated and killed Nawab
Dost Ali, 1740.

=Daman=, Bombay. 20N. 73E. Portuguese possession since 1531.

=Damascus=, Syria. 34N. 36E. Supposed to have been f. by Uz. Conquered by
David, by Jeroboam II., Tiglath-Pileser, Sennacherib, and
Nebuchadnezzar. Subdued by Pompey, 64 B.C.; by Mohammedans, 635;
conquered by Nureddin, 1154; Saladin died here, 1193; Egyptians defeated
by Tamerlane, 1401; taken from Turks by Selim I., 1516; captured by
Ibrahim Pasha, 1832; ceded to Turkey, 1840. Massacre of Jews, 1840; of
Christians, 1860. The English historian Buckle died here. (See
Kinglake's 'Eothen,' Burton's 'Wanderings in Three Continents,' Twain's
'New Pilgrim's Progress,' Lamartine's 'Voyage en Orient,' Hakluyt's
'Voyages,' Burckhardt's 'Travels in Syria and the Holy Land.')

=Daminya=, Bengal. 25N. 88E. Bp. of Mukunda Ram Chakrabarti.

=Daulatabad= ('abode of prosperity'), Haidarabad. 20N. 75E. F. by Bhillama
I., c. 1187 A.D.; seized by Ala-ud-din Khilji, 1294; by Mohammedans,
1307, 1310; Rajah Harpal flayed alive, 1318; captured by Nijam Shakis
from Bahmanis, 1526; from Emperor Akbar, 1595; taken by Malik Amber,
1607; by Shah Jahan, 1633; Abul Hasan imprisoned here by Aurungzebe,
1687.

=Dead Sea=, Palestine. 32N. 36E. Frequently mentioned in biblical history.
(See Kinglake's 'Eothen,' Lamartine's 'Voyage en Orient.')

=Deglur=, Haidarabad. 19N. 78E. Contains tomb of Shah Zia-ud-din Rifai.

=Delhi=, Punjab. 29N. 77E. Captured by Mohammedans, 1193; by Tamerlane,
1398; Sultan Baber established Mogol dynasty, 1526; burnt by Mahrattas,
1736; taken by Persians, who plundered it of treasures, including
Koh-i-noor diamond, 1739; recaptured by Mahrattas, 1789; seized by Lord
Lake, 1803; scene of terrible massacre of British in Mutiny, 1857;
Durbar of Edward VII. held here, 1903; of George V., 1911. (See Mrs. F.
A. Steel's 'On the Face of the Waters' and 'India through the Ages,'
Madhu Sudan Datta's 'Captive Ladie,' Moore's 'Lalla Rookh.')

=Deogarh=, United Provs. 25N. 78E. Contains carvings dating from 1097.
Captured by Colonel Baptiste, 1811.

=Deogurk=, Bengal. 25N. 87E. Contains many temples to Siva, and is famous
place of pilgrimage.

=Deraiyeh=, Arabia. 25N. 46E. Ancient capital of Wahabis; destroyed by
Egyptians under Ibrahim Pasha, 1818.

=Devanhalli=, Madras. 15N. 78E. F. in 1501; captured by Lord Cornwallis,
1791. Bp. of Tippoo Sahib.

=Devikottai=, Madras. 11N. 80E. Taken from Pratap Singh by British, 1749;
occupied by British garrison, 1760.

=Dhampur=, United Provs. 29N. 79E. Captured by Dunde Khan, c. 1750; by
Amir Khan, 1805.

=Dhar=, Central India. 23N. 75E. Destroyed by Jaya Sinha, 1020; yielded to
Aurungzebe, 1658. Bp. of Baji Rao II., and contains mausoleum of
Abdullah Shah Changal, Mohammedan saint.

=Dharapuram=, Madras. 11N. 78E. Taken by Colonel Wood, 1768; by Hyder Ali,
1768; by General Medows, 1790.

=Dharwar=, Bombay. 15N. 75E. Fort said to have been f. by Dhar Rao, 1403;
captured by Ali Adil Shah, 1573; by Aurungzebe, 1685; by Hyder Ali,
1778; British possession, 1818.

=Dholka=, Bombay. 23N. 72E. Captured by Mahrattas, 1736; ceded to British,
1804.

=Dholpur= ('the town of Dholan'), Rajputana. 27N. 78E. Alleged to have
been f. by Dholan Deo. Taken by Sikander Lodi, 1501; by Babar, 1526.

=Dhulia=, Bombay. 21N. 75E. Devastated by Holkar, 1803; British
possession, 1818.

=Diarbekr=, Asiatic Turkey. 38N. 40E. F. on the site of ancient city of
Amida. Fortified by Constantius, 340; captured by Persians, 502; by
Arabs, 640; by Sultan Selim I., 1515.

=Dig=, Rajputana. 27N. 77E. Fell to Najaf Khan, 1776; General Frazer
conquered Holkar in the vicinity, 1804.

=Dindigull=, Madras. 10N. 78E. Overcome by Rajah of Mysore, 1755; taken by
British from Tippoo Sahib, 1783, but given back, 1784; ceded to British,
1792.

=Dipalpur=, Punjab. 31N. 74E. Conquered by Tamerlane, 1398; besieged by
Babar, 1524; by Mahrattas, 1758.

=Diu=, Bombay. 21N. 71E. Occupied by Portuguese, 1515; fortified, 1535;
plundered by Arabs, 1670.

=Dolon-nor=, Mongolia. 42N. 116E. Contains many Buddhist temples, and the
ruins of Changtou described by Marco Polo are near this city.

=Dondra Head= ('island's end'), Ceylon. 6N. 80E. Most southernly point of
island, considered sacred by the Hindus. Ibn Batouka, the Arabian
geographer, visited this place, 1344. Destroyed by Portuguese, 1587.

=Dumdum=, Bengal. 23N. 88E. Scene of Sepoy rising in Mutiny, 1857.

=Dwarka=, Bombay. 22N. 69E. Taken by British, 1816. Associated with
Krishna, and sometimes said to be his birthplace.


=Ecbatana= ('an assembly'), Persia. 35N. 48E. Ancient capital of Media,
supposed to have been f. by Deioces, c. 705 B.C.; now known as Hamadan.
Conquered and plundered by Seleucus, 313; by Alexander, 331 B.C.
Contains tombs alleged to be those of Mordecai and Esther, also mosque
of Avicenna.

=Efsene=, Turkestan. 40N. 65E. Bp. of Avicenna, Persian philosopher and
physician.

=Ekron=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Ancient city of Philistia, frequently
mentioned in the Bible. Taken by Thothmes III., c. 1500 B.C.; by
Sennacherib, 701 B.C.

=Elburz=, Persia. 37N. 50E. Mountains, on one of which Saum exposed his
son Zalzer. (See Firdausi's 'Sha Name.')

=El Elah=, Arabia. 26N. 39E. Visited by C. M. Doughty, and described in
'Travels in Arabia Deserta.'

=Elephanta=, Bombay. 19N. 73E. Sacred island in Hindu mythology,
containing many temples.

=Ellichpur=, Berar. 21N. 77E. F. by Rajah Ellon. Besieged by Mahrattas,
1772; taken by Ala-Eddin, 1794.

=Ellora=, Haidarabad. 20N. 75E. Contains wonderful temples to Buddha hewn
out of rock. The Kailasa temple possesses sculptures of scenes from the
'Ramayana' and the 'Mahabharata.'

=Endor=, Palestine. 33N. 35E. Place where witch summoned before Saul the
spirit of Samuel, who foretold his defeat and death.

=Engedi= ('goat's spring'), Palestine. 31N. 35E. Frequently mentioned in
the Bible, especially as the wilderness to which David fled from Saul.
Pliny refers to it as a ruin.

=Enoshima=, Japan. 35N. 140E. An island near Yokohama containing
celebrated shrine. (See Lafcadio Hearn's 'Glimpses of Unfamiliar
Japan.')

=Ephesus=, Asia Minor. 38N. 27E. Said to have been f. by Amazons, or by
Androcles, son of Codrus. Taken by the Arabs from the Persians, 1283.
Famous as a sacred city of Artemis. The first Christian church
established here, of which Timothy was bishop. John the Baptist and the
Virgin Mary are said to have died in this city. Bp. of Heraclitus,
Hermodorus, Hipponax, and Parrhasius. (See Mark Twain's 'New Pilgrim's
Progress.')

=Erbil=, Asiatic Turkey. 36N. 44E. Darius finally defeated by Alexander, 331
B.C.

=Erivan=, Transcaucasia. 40N. 45E. Taken by the Turks 1582; by Shah Abbas,
1604; stormed by Turks, 1615; unsuccessfully attacked by Heraclius,
1780; by Russians, 1804; taken by Paskevich, 1827; ceded to Russia,
1828. Partially destroyed by earthquake, 1679. (See Bodenstedt's
'Tausend und ein Tage im Orient' for Tatar poem in celebration of
Russian victory.)

=Erode=, Madras. 11N. 78E. Captured by British, 1768; by Hyder Ali, 1768;
by General Medows, 1790.

=Erzerum=, Turkish Armenia. 40N. 41E. Taken by Seljuks, 1201; by Mogols,
1242; by Turks, 1517; by Russians, 1828, 1878; but restored to Turks,
1878. Experienced severe earthquake, 1859.

=Erzingan=, Asiatic Turkey. 40N. 40E. Home of St. Gregory. Greatly
suffered from earthquake, 1774.

=Esdraelon= ('God has sown'), Palestine. 33N. 35E. Plain frequently
occurring in biblical history, notably at the time of Barak's defeat of
Sisera, Gideon's victory over Midianites, and Philistines over Saul,
also in the time of Ahab.

=Eskishehr=, Asiatic Turkey. 40N. 30E. Contains several tombs of
Mohammedan saints. Near the city Godfrey of Bouillon defeated Soliman.

=Etchmiadsin=, Transcaucasia. 40N. 44E. Ecclesiastical capital of Armenia,
with famous monastery. Taken by Russians during Russo-Persian war, 1827;
ceded to Russians, 1828.

=Euphrates=, Asiatic Turkey. 30N. 48E. Most important river of the world.
One of the four rivers of Eden; on its banks Nimrod f. the Babylonian
empire, and the Old Testament patriarchs dwelt.

=Eurymedon=, Asia Minor. 37N. 31E. River at whose mouth Persians were
defeated by Cimon, 466 B.C.

=Everest=, Mount, Nepal. 28N. 87E. Highest known peak in the world, the
altitude of which was discovered by Sir George Everest, 1841; named in
his honour by Sir Andrew Waugh, 1856.


=Falta=, Bengal. 22N. 88E. Scene of British retreat after capture of
Calcutta, 1756.

=Famagousta=, Cyprus. 35N. 34E. F. by Ptolemy Philadelphus. Taken by
Richard Coeur de Lion, 1191; Guy de Lusignan crowned here. Captured by
Genoese, 1376; yielded to Turks, 1571.

=Fatehgarh=, United Provs. 27N. 80E. F. by Nawab Mohammed Khan, c. 1714;
stormed by Mahrattas, 1751; Lord Lake defeated Holkar, 1804.

=Ferozeshah=, Punjab. 31N. 75E. Sir Hugh Gough and Sir Henry Hardinge
defeated Sikhs, 1845. (See Malleson's 'Decisive Battles of India.')

=Firospur= ('city of Firuz'), Punjab. 28N. 77E. Battle fought between
Sikhs and British, which gave Punjab to Britain, 1845.

=Formosa= ('beautiful'), China. 24N. 121E. Portuguese landed, 1590. Dutch
f. Fort Zelandia, 1624; withdrew, 1662. Attached to China, 1683; opened
to foreigners, 1858; Anping and Zelandia occupied by British, 1868, but
restored to China; island invaded by Japanese, 1874; captured by French,
1884; ceded by China to Japan, 1895. (See Diosy's 'New Far East,'
Little's 'Far East.')

=Fort St. David=, Madras. 12N. 80E. F. by Hindu, Chinnia Chetti; purchased
by British, 1690; Clive became its governor, 1756; captured by French
under Lally, 1758; given up, 1760; recaptured, 1782; restored to
British, 1785.

=Fu-chau= ('happy region'), China. 26N. 119E. The walled capital of
Fu-kien. Open to foreign trade, 1842; contains an arsenal constructed by
two Frenchmen, 1867; bombarded by French, 1884.

=Fuji Yama=, Japan. 35N. 139E. Supposed to have sprung up in a single
night, 285 B.C. Highest mountain in Japan, held in religious veneration,
famous in legend, poetry, and art. It is volcanic, the last outbreak
taking place in 1707. (See Lafcadio Hearn's 'Glimpses of Unfamiliar
Japan.')

=Fulia=, Bengal. 23N. 88E. Bp. of Krittibas, translator into Bengali of
'Ramayana.'

=Furruckabad= ('happy abode'), Bengal. 25N. 88E. Lord Lake defeated
Mahratta Holkar, 1805.

=Futtehghur=, Rajputana. 26N. 75E. Nearly entire European inhabitants
massacred, 1857.

=Futtipur-Sikri= ('city of victory'), United Provs. 27N. 78E. F. by Akbar,
1570. Res. and burial-place of Saint Salim Chishti. (See Mrs. F. A.
Steel's 'Prince of Dreamers.')

=Fyzabad=, Afghanistan. 37N. 70E. Destroyed by Murad Beg, 1829; rebuilt by
Faiz Muhammed Khan, 1865.


=Galle=, Ceylon. 6N. 80E. F. by Portuguese, 1518; taken by Dutch, 1642; by
British, 1796.

=Galna=, Bombay. 21N. 75E. Pillaged by Sivaji, 1679; captured by
Aurungzebe, 1705; by Colonel Wallace, 1804.

=Gamala=, Palestine. 33N. 36E. Unsuccessfully besieged by Agrippa;
captured by Vespasian in Jewish war, 66-70.

=Gaur=, Bengal. 25N. 88E. Ancient capital of Bengal. Seized by
Mohammedans, 1204; embellished by Akbar, 1575. (See Burton's 'Vikram and
the Vampire,' 7th story.)

=Gaya=, Bengal. 25N. 85E. Sacred city of the Buddhists, being the bp. of
Buddha.

=Gaza=, Palestine. 32N. 34E. City from which Samson is said to have taken
the gates. Burnt by Syrian king, Alexander Jannæus, 96 B.C.; captured by
Omar, 634; occupied by Templars, 1152; taken by Saladin, 1187. (See
Kinglake's 'Eothen,' Thomson's 'Land and the Book,' Volney's 'Voyage en
Syrie et en Egypte.')

=Gerasa=, Palestine. 32N. 36E. Taken by Alexander Jannæus, 83 B.C.;
rebuilt by Romans, 65 B.C.

=Gethsemane=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Scene of Christ's vigil on the eve of
his crucifixion. (See Lamartine's 'Voyage en Orient.')

=Ghaziabad=, United Provs. 29N. 77E. F. by Ghazi-ud-din, 1740. Suraj Mal
killed by Rohillas, 1763.

=Ghazipur=, United Provs. 26N. 84E. Capital of district of Ghazipur;
contains many magnificent ruins. Lord Cornwallis died here, 1805. (See
Kipling's 'In an Opium Factory.')

=Ghazni=, Afghanistan. 34N. 68E. Seized by Nadir Shah, 1738; by Lord
Keane, 1839; by General Nutt, 1842. Contains tomb of Mahmud of Ghazni,
1030.

=Gheriah=, Bombay. 17N. 73E. Bombarded by British fleet under Admiral
Watson, and captured by Clive, 1756; British possession, 1818.

=Ghodbandar=, Bombay. 19N. 73E. Mahrattas unsuccessfully stormed town,
1672; captured from Portuguese, 1737.

=Ghoraghat=, Bengal. 25N. 89E. Mentioned in the 'Mahabharata' as place of
refuge of Virat Rajah.

=Gibeah=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Res. of King Saul, and alleged to be his
birthplace.

=Gibeon=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Famous in Old Testament history, especially
for Joshua's defence of the city against the Amorites.

=Gilboa=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Range of hills, on one of which King Saul
and his three sons were killed in battle.

=Gingi=, Madras. 12N. 79E. Captured by Bandaullah Khan, 1638; by Sivaji,
1677; besieged for eight years by Zulfikar Khan, 1690; taken by French,
1750; by British, 1761; abandoned to Hyder Ali, 1780.

=Giria=, Bengal. 24N. 88E. Celebrated for defeat of Sarfaraz Khan, 1740;
and Mir Kasim, 1763.

=Giridhi=, Bengal. 24N. 86E. Centre of Karharbari coal-fields, and
described in Kipling's 'Giridih Coal-Fields.'

=Goa=, Bombay. 15N. 74E. Taken by Mohammedans, 1469; by Albuquerque, 1510;
by British, 1807; recaptured by Portuguese, 1815. Contains tomb of St.
Francis Xavier. (See Marryat's 'Phantom Ship,' Burton's 'Goa and the
Blue Mountains,' 'Purchas His Pilgrimes,' Hakluyt's 'Voyages.')

=Gobardanga=, Bengal. 23N. 89E. Alleged place where Krishna guarded his
flocks.

=Gobardhan=, Rajputana. 27N. 77E. Said to have been a favourite res. of
Krishna.

=Gokana=, Punjab. 29N. 77E. Contains tomb of Saint Shah Zia-ud-din
Mohammed.

=Gokarn=, Bombay. 15N. 74E. Place of pilgrimage for Hindus; mentioned in
'Mahabharata' and 'Ramayana.'

=Golconda=, Haidarabad. 18N. 78E. A ruined city, f. by Rajah of Warangal;
destroyed by Aurungzebe, 1687.

=Gooruncondah= ('horse-hill'), Madras. 14N. 79E. Taken by Hyder Ali, 1768;
yielded to Trimbak Rao, 1771; captured by Tippoo Sahib, 1773; British
possession, 1800.

=Granicus=, Asia Minor. 40N. 27E. River on the banks of which Alexander
the Great first defeated the Persians, 334 B.C.; Lucullus defeated
Mithridates, 74 B.C.

=Gujranwala=, Punjab. 32N. 74E. Bp. of Ranjit Singh, and burial-place of
his father and of himself.

=Gujrat=, Punjab. 33N. 74E. Sikhs conquered by Sir Hugh Gough, 1849. (See
Malleson's 'Decisive Battles of India.')

=Gulbarga=, Haidarabad. 17N. 77E. Taken by Zafar Khan, 1347; by Mir Jumla,
1657. Contains tomb of Khwaja Band Nawaz, Mussulman saint.

=Gumush-Khaneh= ('place of silver'), Asiatic Turkey. 41N. 38E. Pasha of
Trebizond defeated by Russians, 1829.

=Gutti=, Madras. 15N. 78E. Res. of Morari Rao. Fell to Hyder Ali, 1775;
British possession, 1800.

=Gwalior=, Central India. 26N. 78E. Contains palace of Man Singh, f. 1486,
and Victoria College; also tombs of Sheik Mohammed Ghaus and of Tan Sen.
Maharajah faithful to England, though his army rebelled during Mutiny,
1857.


=Haidarabad=, Haidarabad. 17N. 79E. Capital of the Nizam's dominions; f.
by Cuttub-Shah, 1585. Taken and plundered by Aurungzebe, 1687.

=Hakata=, Japan. 34N. 130E. Formerly an independent town; now forming part
of Tukuoka. (See Lafcadio Hearn's 'Out of the East.')

=Halicarnassus=, Asia Minor. 37N. 27E. Mausoleum erected here by Artemisia
in honour of her husband, Mausolus. Bp. of Herodotus and Dionysius.

=Hamadan=, Persia. 35N. 48E. F. on the site of ancient Ecbatana,
containing tombs alleged to be of Mordecai and Esther, also those of
Avicenna, Attar, and Abul-Hasi.

=Hamah=, Syria. 35N. 37E. Often mentioned in the Old Testament. Fell into
the hands of Tancred, 1108; of Togtekin, 1115; of Saladin, 1178.
Abulfeda, the Arabian geographer, was emir, 1342-54.

=Hami=, China. 43N. 94E. Described in the 'Travels of Marco Polo.'

=Hang-Chau=, China. 30N. 120E. Capital of Che-kiang. Visited by Marco Polo
and Barrow. Successfully stormed by Taiping rebels, 1861; open to
foreign trade and res., 1896. (See 'Travels of Marco Polo,' Little's
'Far East.')

=Han-kau= ('Han-mouth'), China. 31N. 114E. Greatest commercial city of
empire; mentioned by F. J. Little in 'The Far East.'

=Hanoi= ('within the river'), Indo-China. 21N. 106E. F. by a Chinese
governor, c. 767, became capital of Annam. Citadel built in 808.
Contains a colossal Buddha, also statue to Paul Bert. French possession
since 1882. (See Little's 'Far East.')

=Hansi=, Punjab. 29N. 76E. Alleged to have been f. by Anang Pal. Seized by
Masud, 1036; by Mohammed of Ghor, 1192. Contains tomb of Kulb
Jamal-ud-din.

=Hanumangarh=, Rajputana. 30N. 74E. Tamerlane defeated by Dul Chand, 1398;
taken by Kamran, 1549.

=Harbin=, Manchuria. 46N. 127E. Military base of Russians during
Russo-Japanese War. (See Fraser's 'Real Siberia,' Little's 'Far East.')

=Hardwar= ('gate of Vishnu'), United Provs. 30N. 78E. Famous resort of
pilgrims; battle between two rival sects, 1760; terrible epidemic of
cholera, 1847.

=Harnai=, Bombay. 18N. 73E. Attacked by Commodore James, 1755; captured by
Colonel Kennedy, 1818.

=Hattia=, Bengal. 23N. 91E. Captured by Portuguese pirates, 1607.
Destroyed by cyclone, 1876.

=Hayil=, Arabia. 28N. 42E. Visited by C. M. Doughty, and described in
'Travels in Arabia Deserta.'

=Hebron=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Frequently mentioned in the Bible,
especially in connection with David. Traditionally supposed to have been
f. by Adam. The cave of Macpelah reputed to be here, containing Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Sarah, Rebecca, and Leah. The tombs are shown of Ruth,
Jesse, and Abner. Conquered by Saladin, 1187; destroyed by Ibrahim
Pasha, 1834 and 1837. (See Thomson's 'Land and the Book.')

=Hei-ku-tai=, Manchuria. 42N. 123E. Seized by the Russians, 1904.

=Herat=, Afghanistan. 34N. 62E. Foundation attributed to Alexander the
Great. Taken by Arabs, 661; by Nadir Shah, 1730; Persians defeated by
British, 1837; fell to Yar Mohammed Khan, 1842; to Dost Mohammed, 1862.
(See Rawlinson's 'England and Russia in the East.')

=Heshbon=, Palestine. 32N. 36E. Mentioned in the Bible, and described by
C. M. Doughty in 'Travels in Arabia Deserta.'

=Hikone=, Japan. 35N. 137E. Contains remains of ancient Daimio castle.
Battle of Sekigahare fought near here, 1600.

=Hinomizaki=, Japan. 35N. 132E. Described by Lafcadio Hearn in 'Glimpses
of Unfamiliar Japan.'

=Hissar=, Punjab. 29N. 76E. F. by Firoz Shah Tughlak, 1356; captured by
the adventurer, George Thomas, 1783; mutinied 1857.

=Homs=, Syria. 35N. 37E. Aurelian conquered Zenobia, 272; city captured by
Saracens, 636; by Crusaders, 1099; Turks defeated by Ibrahim Pasha in
command of Egyptian forces, 1832. Bp. of Heliogabalus. (See Volney's
'Voyage en Syrie et en Egypte.')

=Honawar=, Bombay. 14N. 74E. Visited by Ibn Batatu, 1342. Occupied by
Portuguese, 1505; captured by British, 1783, 1799.

=Hong-Kong= ('fragrant streams'), China. 22N. 114E. Occupied by British
troops, 1841; ceded to Britain, 1842. (See Kipling's 'From Sea to Sea,'
Little's 'Far East.')

=Hor= ('mountain'), Arabia Petræa. 30N. 36E. Mountain on which tradition
relates the death of Aaron took place.

=Horeb=, Arabia Petræa. 29N. 34E. Mountain on which Moses is said to have
seen the burning bush, and to which Elijah fled from Jezebel. (See
'Purchas His Pilgrimes.')

=Hsi-ngan= ('west tranquil city'), China. 34N. 109E. Visited by Marco
Polo; contains oldest mosque in China and tablet with Chinese and Syriac
inscription dating from 781. Emperor and dowager empress sought refuge
here, 1900.

=Hubli= ('old village'), Bombay. 15N. 75E. Captured by Muazzam, 1685; by
General Munro, 1818.

=Hue=, Indo-China. 16N. 108E. Capital of Annam; forts taken by French,
1883. (See Little's 'Far East.')

=Hugli=, Bengal. 22N. 88E. F. by Portuguese, 1537; besieged by Shah Jahan,
1629; Mohammedans made it royal port, 1632; East India Company
established factory, 1640; destroyed by fire, 1685.


=Ida=, Asia Minor. 40N. 27E. Range of mountains celebrated by Homer. In
them the Simois, Granicus and Scamander had their origin, and Troy lay
in the valley. Supposed scene of rape of Ganymede and judgment of Paris.

=Ipsus=, Asia Minor. 39N. 31E. Seleucus and Lysimachus conquered Antigonus
and Demetrius Poliorcetes, 301 B.C. or 300 B.C.

=Irkutsk=, Siberia. 52N. 104E. F. by Cossacks, 1653; proclaimed town, and
first church built, 1686; government headquarters, 1736; devastated by
fire, 1879. (See Fraser's 'Real Siberia.')

=Isker=, Siberia. 58N. 67E. Captured by Russians under Yermak, 1579.

=Ismid=, Asia Minor. 41N. 30E. Formerly capital of Bithynia under name of
Nicomedia; given to the Romans by Nicomede III. Destroyed by Goths, and
by earthquake, 358. Taken by Turks, 1326.

=Isnik=, Asia Minor. 40N. 30E. F. by Antigone. Nicene creed formed here by
a council held against Arius, 325.

=Ispahan=, Persia. 33N. 52E. Said to have been f. by Jews who were taken
captive by Nebuchadnezzar; former capital of Persia. Tamerlane massacred
the inhabitants, 1392; besieged and plundered by Afghans, 1722; re-taken
by Nadir Shah, 1729. (See Montesquieu's 'Lettres Persanes,' 'Purchas His
Pilgrimes.')

=Issus=, Asia Minor. 37N. 36E. Alexander the Great conquered Darius in a
decisive battle, 333 B.C.; Septimus Severus defeated Niger, 194;
Heraclius overthrew Persians, 622.

=Istalif=, Afghanistan. 35N. 69E. Destroyed by British, 1842.


=Jabbok= ('copious river'), Palestine. 32N. 36E. River on the banks of
which Jacob is supposed to have wrestled with an angel. (See Doughty's
'Travels in Arabia Deserta.')

=Jaffa=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Celebrated in heathen mythology as the scene
of the adventure of Perseus and Andromeda, in Scripture history as the
port from which Jonas embarked and city in which Peter raised Tabitha.
Cæsar yielded town to the Jews, but it returned to Rome, 6; taken by
El-Malik el-Adil, Saladin's brother, 1188; ceded to Christians, 1204;
restored by Frederick II., 1228; fortified by St. Louis, 1252;
dismantled by Beybars, 1267; taken by Napoleon, 1799; by Mehemet Ali,
1832; by Turks, 1840. Partially destroyed by earthquake, 1838. (See
Lamartine's 'Voyage en Orient,' Thomson's 'Land and the Book,' Hakluyt's
'Voyages.')

=Jalalabad=, Afghanistan. 34N. 70E. F. by Akbar, 1570. Sir Robert Sale
made a successful resistance against Afghans, 1842.

=Jalandhar=, Punjab. 31N. 76E. Visited by Hiuen Tsiang. Destroyed by
Sikhs, 1757; taken by Ranjit Singh, 1811.

=Jamalpur=, Bengal. 25N. 86E. Chief locomotive centre of East Indian
Railway, described by Kipling in 'Among the Railway Folk.'

=Jaypur=, Rajputana. 27N. 76E. F. by Sawai Jai Singh, 1728; greatest city
of Rajputana. (See Kipling's 'Letters of Marque.')

=Jericho=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Ancient city frequently mentioned in
biblical history, and also by Josephus and Strabo. It was destroyed by
Joshua, but rebuilt in Ahab's reign. Here Christ healed blind Bartimæus.
(See Twain's 'New Pilgrim's Progress,' Lamartine's 'Voyage en Orient,'
Thomson's 'Land and the Book.')

=Jerusalem=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Ancient capital of Palestine, mentioned
in Egyptian record c. 1400 B.C. Destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, 586 B.C.;
Jews permitted to return by Cyrus, 536 B.C.; Jews massacred by Antiochus
IV., 168 B.C.; fortified by Judas Maccabæus, 165 B.C.; captured by
Pompey, 63 B.C.; taken and destroyed by Titus, 70; new city f. by
Hadrian, 71; Godfrey de Bouillon reigned, 1099; passed into hands of
Ottoman Turks, 1516. (See Kinglake's 'Eothen,' Firdausi's 'Sha Name,'
Twain's 'New Pilgrim's Progress,' Lamartine's 'Voyage en Orient,'
'Purchas His Pilgrimes,' Thomson's 'Land and the Book,' Hakluyt's
'Voyages.')

=Jezreel= ('God sows'), Palestine. 33N. 35E. A town near which Saul fell
in battle, containing the res. of Jezebel and Ahab.

=Jhansi=, Central India. 26N. 79E. F. by Bir Singh Deo. Massacre of
Europeans in the Mutiny, 1857.

=Jhelum=, Punjab. 31N. 72E. The Hydaspes of classical literature, on the
banks of which Alexander the Great defeated the Indian chief Porus.

=Jidda=, Arabia. 22N. 39E. Taken by Turks, 1840; massacre of Christian
missionaries, 1858. Contains supposed tomb of Eve. (See Doughty's
'Travels in Arabia Deserta,' Burckhardt's 'Travels in Arabia.')

=Jind=, Punjab. 29N. 76E. Attacked by Gajpat Singh, 1755; Rahim Dad Khan
here met his death, 1775.

=Joonir=, Bombay. 19N. 74E. F. by Malik-ut-Tujar, 1436; pillaged by
Sivaji, 1657.

=Jordan=, Palestine. 32N. 36E. Chief river of Palestine, of which mention
occurs frequently in biblical history. (See Kinglake's 'Eothen,'
Lamartine's 'Voyage en Orient.')

=Jugduluk=, Afghanistan. 35N. 70E. British troops massacred, 1842.


=Kabbaldurga=, Madras. 12N. 77E. Chama Rajah imprisoned here in 1734, and
Morari Rao by Hyder Ali.

=Kabul=, Afghanistan. 35N. 69E. Conquered by Nadir Shah, 1739; by British,
1839; massacre of British soldiers, 1842; retaken by British, 1842; by
Shere Ali, 1868; massacre of Major Cavagnari, 1879; Lord Roberts subdued
city in his campaign, 1878-80. (See Firdausi's 'Sha Name.')

=Kagoshima=, Japan. 35N. 140E. Destroyed by British fleet, 1863; Satsuma
Rebellion had its origin here, but was crushed, 1877.

=Kaithal=, Punjab. 30N. 76E. Contains tomb of Mohammedan saint
Salah-ud-din of Balkh. Captured by Bhai Desu Singh, 1767.

=Kalat=, Baluchistan. 29N. 67E. Unsuccessfully attacked by Ahmad Shah
Durrani, 1758; captured by British, 1839.

=Kalgan=, China. 41N. 115E. Walled city mentioned by A. J. Little in 'The
Far East.'

=Kallinjar=, Bengal. 25N. 80E. Connected with worship of Siva. Attacked by
Mahmoud of Ghazni, 1023; captured by Kutb-ud-din, 1203; besieged by
Humayun, 1530; taken by Akbar, 1569; by British, 1812.

=Kalpi=, United Provs. 26N. 80E. Said to have been f. by Basdeo. Captured
by Kutb-ud-din, 1196; by Humayun, 1527; by British, 1798.

=Kalyan=, Bombay. 19N. 73E. Captured by Portuguese, 1536; by Mohammedans,
1660; by British, 1780.

=Kamagawa=, Japan. 35N. 140E. Town at which treaty was signed opening
Japan to Europeans, 1854.

=Kamakura=, Japan. 35N. 140E. Former capital of Shogunate, and contains
colossal statue of Buddha. (See Lafcadio Hearn's 'Glimpses of Unfamiliar
Japan.')

=Kampil=, Bengal. 28N. 79E. Mentioned in 'Mahabharata' as scene of wedding
of Draupadi.

=Kan-chow=, China. 39N. 101E. Described in 'Travels of Marco Polo.'

=Kanchrapara=, Bengal. 22N. 88E. Bp. of Iswar Chandra Gupta.

=Kandahar=, Afghanistan. 32N. 66E. F. by Ahmed Shah, 1747, near site of
city f. by Alexander the Great, 330 B.C. Taken by British, 1839, 1879.
Stormed by Ayub Khan, but relieved by Lord Roberts, 1880.

=Kandy=, Ceylon. 7N. 81E. Contained temple in which was supposed to be a
tooth of Buddha; destroyed by Portuguese. Capital of Ceylon, 1592; taken
by Portuguese, 1796; entered by British, 1803; became British
possession, 1815.

=Kang-hwa= ('river-flower'), Korea. 38N. 127E. Plundered by French under
Admiral Roze, 1866; attacked by Americans, 1871; peace established by
treaty, 1875.

=Kangra=, Punjab. 32N. 76E. Pillaged by Firoz Shah, 1360; taken by Sansar
Chand, 1785.

=Kapilavastu=, Nepal. 28N. 83E. Site of city not definitely known, but was
ancient capital of Sakyas, and bp. of Buddha. (See Sir Edwin Arnold's
'Light of Asia.')

=Karachi=, Sind. 25N. 67E. F. in 1725; ceded by Talpur Amirs to British,
1842.

=Karakoram=, China. 46N. 102E. Said to be ancient capital of Genghis Khan.
(See 'Travels of Marco Polo.')

=Karazan=, China. 25N. 103E. Capital of province of Yun-Nan. (See 'Travels
of Marco Polo.')

=Karikal=, Madras, 11N. 80E. Ceded to French by Rajah of Tanjaur, 1739;
seized by British, 1803; restored to French, 1814.

=Karnal=, Punjab. 30N. 77E. Contains tomb of Bu-Ali Kalandar. Pillaged by
Ibrahim Husain Mirza, 1573; captured by Mahrattas, 1787; by British,
1805.

=Kars=, Armenia. 41N. 43E. Taken by Turks, 1546; fortified, 1579;
conquered by Persians, 1744; by Russians, under Paskevitch, 1828; Ismael
Pasha and General Williams held it unsuccessfully against Russians,
1855; stormed by Russians, 1877; and ceded to them, 1878.

=Karur= ('embryo town'), Madras. 11N. 78E. Seized by British, 1760; by
Hyder Ali, 1768; by General Medows, 1790.

=Kashgar=, Eastern Turkestan. 39N. 76E. Rebelled against China, and became
capital of Yakub Beg's dominions, 1865; retaken by Chinese, 1877. (See
'Travels of Marco Polo,' Rawlinson's 'England and Russia in the East,'
Little's 'Far East.')

=Kashmir, Vale of=, Kashmir. 34N. 75E. Scene of the story of 'The Light of
the Haram' in Moore's 'Lalla Rookh.'

=Kasur=, Punjab. 31N. 75E. Alleged to have been f. by Kusa, son of Rama.
Besieged by Bhangi chiefs, 1763, 1770; Ranjit Singh defeated Kutb-ud-din
Khan, 1807.

=Katwa=, Bengal. 24N. 88E. Sacred town as res. of apostle Chaitanya.

=Kaveripak=, Madras. 13N. 79E. Rajah Sahib and French defeated by Clive,
1752. (See Malleson's 'Decisive Battles of India.')

=Kaveripatnam=, Madras. 12N. 78E. Taken from Hyder Ali by British, 1767.

=Kendubilwa=, Bengal. 24N. 88E. Bp. and burial-place of Jayadeva, composer
of 'Gita Govinda.' (See R. C. Dutt's 'Lit. of Bengal.')

=Kerbela=, Asiatic Turkey. 33N. 44E. Hosein, son of Caliph Ali, killed in
battle with rival Yazid, 680; chief building of the city, visited by
many pilgrims, is mosque containing Hosein's tomb. Subdued by Turks,
1843.

=Kerkouk=, Kurdistan. 35N. 44E. Stormed and taken by Nadir Shah, 1741.
Tomb is shown supposed to be of Daniel and other 'children of the
furnace.'

=Kerman=, Persia. 30N. 56E. Taken and plundered by Mahomed Khan, 1794.

=Khaiba=, Arabia. 26N. 40E. Visited by C. M. Doughty, and described in
'Travels in Arabia Deserta.'

=Khaiber Pass=, Afghanistan. 34N. 71E. In Afghan wars opposition to
British passage overcome, 1839; terrible loss encountered in retreat,
1842; held by neighbouring Afridis, 1879.

=Khatmandu=, Nepal. 28N. 85E. Believed to have been f. c. 723. Massacre of
British, 1846.

=Khios=, Asiatic Turkey. 38N. 26E. Famous as bp. of Ion, Theocritus, and
Theopompus; contained the 'school of Homer.'

=Khiva=, Russian Turkestan. 42N. 60E. Captured by Russians under General
Kaufmann, 1873. (See Rawlinson's 'England and Russia in the East.')

=Khuldabad=, Haidarabad. 20N. 75E. Contains many tombs of famous men,
among others those of Nasir Jang and Aurungzebe.

=Kiakhta=, Siberia. 50N. 107E. Described by Bishop Sheepshanks in 'My Life
in Mongolia and Siberia.'

=Kidron=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Valley which was the scene of many
incidents in biblical narratives; David crossed the River Kidron when
fleeing from Absalom. Believed will be scene of Last Judgment. Mentioned
by Jerome and Eusebius.

=Kin-chau=, Manchuria. 39N. 121E. Japanese defeated Russians, 1904.

=King-te-shen=, China. 29N. 117E. Partially destroyed by Tai-ping rebels,
1855.

=Kioto=, Japan. 35N. 136E. F. by Kuwammu. Former capital of Japan. (See
Lafcadio Hearn's 'Out of the East,' Kipling's 'From Sea to Sea.')

=Kirtipur=, Punjab. 32N. 75E. Nanek, founder of Sikh religion, and
compiler of 'Adi-Granth' died here.

=Kishon=, Palestine. 33N. 35E. Scene of defeat of Sisera, and Elijah's
destruction of the prophets of Baal. Battle fought on banks of river
between Turks and French, 1799.

=Kizuki=, Japan. 35N. 133E. Great centre of Shinto religion in Japan. (See
Lafcadio Hearn's 'Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan.')

=Kobe=, Japan. 35N. 135E. Formerly an independent town, but united to
Hiogo, 1892. (See Kipling's 'From Sea to Sea.')

=Kolar=, Mysore. 13N. 78E. Contains tomb of father of Hyder Ali. Given to
Hyder Ali, 1761; captured by British, 1768; by Mahrattas, 1770; by
British, 1791.

=Kondapalli=, Madras. 17N. 81E. F. c. 1360. Seized by Krishna Deva, c.
1515; by Aurungzebe, 1687; by British, 1766.

=Konieh=, Asia Minor. 38N. 33E. City in which Paul and Barnabas preached.
Taken by Seljuks 1075; by Frederick Barbarossa, 1190; by Mohammed II.,
1466. Mentioned by Xenophon in the 'Anabasis.'

=Kos=, Asia Minor. 37N. 27E. Site of famous temple of Æsculapius. Bp. of
Hippocrates, Apelles, Philetas, Ariston. Theocritus also lived here.

=Kotagherry=, Madras. 11N. 77E. Res. of Sir R. Burton, described in 'Goa
and the Blue Mountains.'

=Koum=, Persia. 29N. 56E. Celebrated place of pilgrimage and contains
shrine of Fatima, sister of Reza. (See Montesquieu's 'Lettres
Persanes.')

=Kuldja=, East Turkestan. 44N. 81E. City f. after destruction of Tatar
Kulja, 1865; taken by Russians, 1871; restored to China, 1881.

=Kumarhatta=, Bengal. 24N. 89E. Bp. of poet Ram Prasad Sen.

=Kunnoj=, United Provs. 27N. 80E. Contains two Mohammedan mausoleums in
memory of Bala Pir and his son, 1650. King of Kanauj conquered by Sultan
of Delhi, 1193.


=Lahore=, Punjab. 32N. 74E. Taken by Mahmoud, 1013, 1021; by Mohammed the
Gouride, 1186; plundered and destroyed by Moguls, 1241; rebuilt, 1269;
conquered by Baber, 1522; by Sikhs, 1758; Sikhs defeated by British,
1846; became incorporated with British Empire, 1849. (See 'Purchas His
Pilgrimes,' Kipling's 'Kim.')

=Lampsacus=, Asia Minor. 40N. 27E. Ancient centre of worship of Priapus.
Bp. of Charon, Anaximenus, and Metrodorus.

=Lang-son=, Indo-China. 22N. 107E. Taken by the French under General de
Négrier, 1885.

=Laswari=, Rajputana. 28N. 77E. Total defeat of Mahrattas by British,
1803. (See Malleson's 'Decisive Battles of India.')

=Latakia=, Syria. 36N. 36E. Scene of Dolabella's last siege, 43 B.C.;
taken by Tancred, 1102; by Saladin, 1188. Experienced severe
earthquakes, 1170, 1287, 1822. (See Volney's 'Voyage en Syrie et en
Egypte.')

=Lebanon, Mounts.=, Palestine. 34N. 36E. Mountain range mentioned in the
Bible as famous for cedars. Visited by Lamartine, 1832. (See 'Voyage en
Orient,' Thomson's 'Land and the Book,' Burckhardt's 'Travels in Syria
and the Holy Land.')

=Leh=, Kashmir. 34N. 78E. Contains tomb of Stolitzka, the Austrian
geologist, who died here, 1874.

=Leiah=, Punjab. 31N. 71E. F. by Kamal Khan, c. 1550; Humayun Shah
captured near here, 1794.

=Lhasa= ('God's house'), Tibet. 31N. 91E. Sacred city of Lamas, containing
famous statue of Buddha. Forbidden to European explorers, but has been
entered several times. (See Little's 'Far East.')

=Liao-yang=, Manchuria. 41N. 123E. Japanese secured a victory over
Russians, 1904. (See McKenzie's 'From Tokyo to Tiflis.')

=Ligor=, Siam. 8N. 100E. Taken by Burmese, 1760, 1785.

=Lohogarh=, Bombay. 19N. 73E. Mentioned by Ptolemy. Taken by Sivaji, 1648;
by British, 1818.

=Lonar=, Berar. 20N. 77E. Scene of struggle between Lonasur and an
incarnation of Vishnu.

=Lucknow=, United Provs. 27N. 81E. Contains mausoleum of Asaf-ud-Daula.
Seized by Humayun, 1526; by Babar, 1528; native insurrection against
British, 1857; recaptured by British, 1858. (See Mrs. F. A. Steel's 'On
the Face of the Waters,' Kipling's 'Kim.')


=Macao=, China. 22N. 114E. Portuguese bought right to settle here, 1557;
Chinese barricaded it from rest of island, 1573; occupied by British,
1802, 1808; port declared free, 1846. Camöens res. here in exile, and
wrote part of his 'Lusiad.'

=Madakasira=, Madras. 14N. 77E. Captured by Mahrattas, 1728; by Hyder Ali,
1762; by Morari Rao, 1764; recaptured by Hyder Ali, 1776.

=Madras=, Madras. 13N. 80E. British established here, 1639; besieged by
Aurungzebe's general, 1702; by the Mahrattas, 1741; Fort George f. by
Francis Day, 1744; taken by French, 1746; recovered by British, 1748;
San Thomé, Portuguese settlement, f. in 1504, annexed, 1749;
unsuccessfully attacked by French under General Lally, 1758, 1759.
Cathedral of Saint Thomé supposed to contain remains of Saint Thomas.

=Madura=, Madras, 10N. 78E. Taken by Malik Kafur, 1324; by Nawab of
Carnatic, 1736; held by British for Mohammed Ali, 1764; ceded to
British, 1801.

=Mahaban=, Bengal. 27N. 78E. Alleged scene of childhood of Krishna.

=Mahe=, Madras. 12N. 76E. Taken by French, 1722; by British, 1761, 1779,
1793; restored to French, 1815.

=Malatiyeh=, Asiatic Turkey. 38N. 38E. Khosros I. defeated by Romans, 577;
taken by Bajazet, 1396; by Tamerlane, 1401. Polyeuctus martyred here;
great massacre of Christians, 1895. (See Corneille's 'Polyeucte.')

=Mandalay=, Upper Burma. 22N. 96E. F. in 1859; became capital of Burma,
1878; occupied by British, 1885; partially destroyed by fire, 1892.

=Mandawar=, United Provs. 29N. 78E. Taken by Tamerlane, 1399; plundered by
Amir Khan, 1805.

=Mangalore=, Madras. 13N. 75E. Visited by Ibn Batatu. Occupied by
Portuguese, 1596; sustained terrible siege against Tippoo Sahib, 1782-3;
taken by British, 1799.

=Manila=, Luzon. 15N. 121E. Capital of Philippine Islands; f. by Spaniard,
Legazpi, 1571. Plundered by Chinese pirates, 1574; blockaded by Dutch,
1602; taken by British, 1762; Spanish fleet destroyed by Dewey off
coast, 1898. Severe earthquakes, 1675, 1824, 1863.

=Manissa=, Asiatic Turkey. 39N. 27E. Ancient Magnesia, near which were
supposed to be kingdom of Tantalulus, and scene of Niobe's sorrow.
Antiochus the Great defeated by Romans, 190 B.C.; city occupied by Osman
Turks, 1398.

=Maraglak=, Persia. 37N. 46E. Contains tomb of Hulaka Khan, and remains of
observatory built by him for the great astronomer, Nasr-ud-din of Tus.

=Masulipatam=, Madras. 16N. 81E. British settled here, 1611; successfully
stormed by Colonel Forde, 1759. (See Malleson's 'Decisive Battles of
India,' 'Purchas His Pilgrimes.')

=Matsuye=, Japan. 36N. 133E. Former capital of Idzumo, and contains
numerous temples. (See Lafcadio Hearn's 'Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan.')

=Mecca=, Arabia. 21N. 40E. Bp. of Mohammed, c. 570. Contains the Kaaba,
said to be built by Abraham and Ishmael with help from Angel Gabriel.
Taken by Wahabis, 1803, 1807; by Mehemet Ali, 1813. (See Sir R. Burton's
'Wanderings in Three Continents' and 'Pilgrimage to Al-Madinah and
Meccah,' Hakluyt's 'Voyages,' Burckhardt's 'Travels in Arabia.')

=Medina= ('the city'), Arabia. 25N. 40E. Sacred city of Islam, whence
Mohammed fled from Mecca, 622; contains tomb supposed to hold remains of
the prophet, his daughter Fatima, Abu Bekr, and Omar. Forbidden city to
all not Mohammedans, but visited by Burckhardt, 1811; Burton, 1852. (See
Sir R. Burton's 'Wanderings in Three Continents' and 'Pilgrimage to
Al-Madinah and Meccah,' Burckhardt's 'Travels in Arabia.')

=Meerut=, United Provs. 29N. 78E. Plundered by Mahmud of Ghazni, 1017; by
Tamerlane, 1399; taken by British, 1803; first outbreak of Indian
Mutiny, 1857.

=Megiddo=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Ancient city of Syria. Mentioned in Bible
as being fortified by Solomon; refuge of Ahaziah fleeing from Jehu, 843
B.C.; Necho overcame Josiah, c. 609 B.C.

=Menderes=, Asia Minor. 38N. 28E. Said to be ancient Scamander, flowing
past Troy, and sung of by Homer.

=Merta=, Rajputana. 27N. 74E. F. by Duda, c. 1488. Captured by Akbar,
1562.

=Merv=, Turkestan. 38N. 62E. Colonised by Alexander the Great, occupied by
Arabs, 666; taken by Mongols, 1221; by Bokharians from Persians, 1787;
occupied by Tekke-Turkomans, 1856; under Russian authority, 1884.

=Meshed=, Persia. 36N. 59E. Contains magnificent mausoleum of Imam Riza
and Caliph Haroun-al-Raschid.

=Meshed Ali=, Asiatic Turkey. 32N. 44E. Contains tomb of Ali.

=Miana=, Persia. 37N. 47E. The French traveller, Thévenot, died here,
1667.

=Miani=, Sind. 26N. 68E. Sir Charles Napier twice defeated Mohammedan
emirs, 1843.

=Michmash=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Mentioned by Josephus and Eusebius, and
in the Old Testament as the camping-place of the Philistines in the
early part of reign of Saul.

=Midagesidurga=, Madras. 14N. 77E. Seized by Hyder Ali, 1761; by
Mahrattas, 1767; by Tippoo Sahib, 1774.

=Miletus=, Asia Minor. 38N. 27E. Cyrus defeated, 548 B.C.; city destroyed
by Persians, 494 B.C. Res. of St. Paul for several days. Bp. of
historians Cadmus and Hecatæus, philosophers Thales, Anaximander, and
Anaximenes; also of poet Timothy, of Aristides, Æschines, and Aspasia.

=Mionoseki=, Japan. 36N. 132E. Described by Lafcadio Hearn in 'Glimpses of
Unfamiliar Japan.'

=Mityleni=, Asiatic Turkey. 39N. 27E. Rebellion crushed by Athenians, 428
B.C.; ceded to Genoese family, 1355; taken by Mohammed II., 1462;
unsuccessful rebellion against Turks, 1468; Venetian naval victories
over Turks, 1690, 1698; Greek victory, 1821. Bp. of Sappho, Alcæus,
Terpander, and Theophrastus; place of retirement of Agrippa.

=Monghyr=, Bengal. 25N. 86E. Taken by Mohammedans, 1195; became res. of
Todar Mal, 1590; taken by British from Nawab Mir Kasim, 1763.

=Mosul=, Asiatic Turkey. 36N. 43E. Taken by Moslems, 636; stormed by
Saladin, 1182; occupied by Persians, 1623; unsuccessfully besieged by
Nadir Shah, 1741.

=Mukden=, Manchuria. 42N. 124E. Contains relics of Nurhachu, and near town
is his tomb. Boxer outbreak, 1900; in Russo-Japanese War, Russians
defeated and Japanese occupied Mukden, 1905. (See Père Amiot for French
translation of Emperor K'ien Lung's poem 'En Mukden.')

=Multan=, Punjab. 30N. 71E. Contains tombs of Rukn-i-Alam, Bhawal Hakk and
Shams-i-Tabriz. Mahmud of Ghazni took it, 1005; Ranjit Singh, 1818;
British, in Sikh War, 1849.

=Murshidabad=, Bengal. 24N. 88E. Contains tomb of Jagath Singh. Last
Mohammedan capital of Bengal; plundered by Mahrattas, 1742; entered by
Clive, 1757; Warren Hastings removed civil and criminal courts to
Calcutta, 1772.

=Muscat=, Arabia. 24N. 59E. Occupied by Albuquerque, 1507; besieged by
Imam of Oman, 1648; Portuguese expelled by Oman, 1650.

=Mush=, Asiatic Turkey. 39N. 42E. Turks massacred Armenians, 1894. Visited
by Xenophon, and supposed burial-place of Moses of Chorene.

=Muttra=, United Provs. 27N. 78E. Contains ruins of Jey Singh's
observatory and of Akbar's fort. Supposed bp. of Krishna, whose
childhood was spent here, and Balarama. Pillaged by Mahmud of Ghazni,
1017; taken by British, 1803; Sepoys murdered British officers, 1857.


=Nabadwip=, Bengal. 23N. 88E. Bp. of Chaitanya, supposed to be incarnation
of Krishna; res. of Nityananda, Vasudeb, and Raghumath.

=Nabulus=, Palestine. 32N. 33E. On site of ancient Shechem mentioned in
biblical history; later was rebuilt as Neapolis by Vespasian. (See
Kinglake's 'Eothen,' Mark Twain's 'New Pilgrim's Progress,' Thomson's
'Land and the Book,' Volney's 'Voyage en Syrie et en Egypte.')

=Nagar= ('the city'), Madras. 14N. 75E. Captured by Hyder Ali, 1763; taken
by British, 1783.

=Nagasaki=, Japan. 33N. 130E. Scene of Pierre Loti's 'Madame
Chrysanthème.' (See also Kipling's 'From Sea to Sea,' Little's 'Far
East.')

=Nagpur= ('town of serpents'), Central Provs. 21N. 79E. Former capital of
Mahratta principality, crushed by British, 1817.

=Nain=, Palestine. 33N. 35E. Scene of Christ's miracle of raising from the
dead the widow's son. (See Mark Twain's 'New Pilgrim's Progress.')

=Najibabad=, United Provs. 30N. 78E. F. by Najib-ud-dowlah, 1755.
Destroyed by Mahrattas, 1772.

=Nakhitchevan=, Asiatic Russia. 40N. 45E. Said to be oldest city in
world, f. by Noah. Taken by Seljuk Sultan, 1064; ceded to Russia by
Persia, 1828.

=Nandidrug=, Madras. 13N. 78E. Captured by Lord Cornwallis, 1791.

=Nan-king= ('southern capital'), China. 32N. 119E. Treaty which ended
Opium War signed, 1842; city taken by Taipings, 1853; by Imperialists,
1864. (See 'Purchas His Pilgrimes,' Little's 'Far East.')

=Nannur=, Bengal. 24N. 88E. Bp. of Chandidas, the poet.

=Narnaul=, Punjab. 28N. 76E. Said to have been f. by Rajah Launkarn, and
to be bp. of Sher Shah.

=Nasik=, Bombay. 20N. 74E. Noted for Lena caves with Buddhistic
sculptures. Here, according to the 'Ramayana,' Ravana carried away Siva,
Rama's wife.

=Nazareth=, Palestine. 33N. 35E. Res. of the Virgin Mary and of Christ;
Church of Annunciation f., c. 1620. Town captured by Moslems, 1291;
Junot vanquished combined army of Turks and Arabs, 1799. (See Kinglake's
'Eothen,' Lamartine's 'Voyage en Orient,' Thomson's 'Land and the
Book.')

=Negapatam=, Madras. 11N. 80E. Conquered by Dutch, 1660; by British, 1781.
(See 'Purchas His Pilgrimes.')

=Nehavend=, Persia. 34N. 48E. Great victory of Saracens which brought
Persia under their sway, 641.

=Nellore=, Madras. 14N. 80E. Ancient fort of Sinhapur, 'the lion city;'
repulsed British, 1757.

=Nertchinsk=, Siberia. 52N. 117E. Treaty signed between Russians and
Chinese, 1689. (See Fraser's 'Real Siberia.')

=Nicæa= ('city of victory'), Asia Minor. 40N. 30E. F. by Antigonus, c. 316
B.C. Taken by Seljuks, 1078; by Crusaders, 1097; by the Osmanlis, 1326.
Bp. of historian Dion Cassius and astronomer Hipparchus. Council met,
325.

=Nicomedia=, Asiatic Turkey. 41N. 30E. F. by Nicomedes I., 264 B.C.;
contains ruins of which Pliny the Younger boasted. Bp. of Arrian; res.
of Diocletian, and of Constantine who died here; scene of Hannibal's
suicide.

=Nicosia=, Cyprus. 35N. 33E. Capital of Cyprus since time of Lusignan
kings. Taken by Richard Coeur de Lion, 1191; besieged by Turks, 1570.

=Nikaria=, Asiatic Turkey. 38N. 26E. Island near which it is fabled Icarus
met his death.

=Nikko= ('sun's brightness'), Japan. 37N. 140E. Contains tomb of Iyeyasu,
1617; and that of his grandson, Iyemitsu, slain while visiting tomb of
Iyeyasu, 1650. (See Kipling's 'From Sea to Sea.')

=Nineveh=, Asiatic Turkey. 36N. 43E. Said to have been f. c. 2680 B.C.;
enlarged by Ninus, 1968 B.C. Conquered by Arbaces, 759 B.C.; by
Nabopolassar, 625 B.C.; destroyed by Medes and Babylonians, c. 607 B.C.
Excavations by Botta, 1842; Layard, 1845; also by Hormuzd Rassam and
George Smith. Tobit said to have died here. (See 'Apocrypha.')

=Ning-po= ('calm waves'), China. 30N. 121E. Occupied by Portuguese, 1522;
Portuguese massacred, 1545; taken by British, 1842. (See 'Travels of
Marco Polo.')

=Nishapur=, Persia. 36N. 59E. Famous as bp. of Omar Khayyam, whose tomb is
also here. Res. of Nidhami-i-Arudi.

=Nisib=, Asiatic Turkey. 37N. 38E. Turks defeated by Egyptians under
Ibrahim Pasha, 1839.

=Nisibin=, Asiatic Turkey. 37N. 41E. Captured by Parthians, 149 B.C.; by
Lucullus, 68 B.C.; by Trajan, 116; by Lucius Verus, 165; given to
Persians by Jovian, 363.


=Oki Shima=, Japan. 36N. 133E. An island off the west coast of Houdo,
fully described by Lafcadio Hearn in 'Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan.'

=Omsk=, Asiatic Russia. 55N. 74E. Capital of Akmolinsk. (See Fraser's
'Real Siberia.')

=Ophir, Mount=, Malay Peninsula. 2N. 103E. Gold-producing mountain often
identified with the Ophir of the Bible. (See 'Purchas His Pilgrimes.')

=Opon=, Philippine Islands. 11N. 124E. Magellan killed here by natives,
1521.

=Ormuz=, Persia. 27N. 56E. Visited by Nearchus, 325 B.C. Captured by
Albuquerque, 1507, 1514; by Shah Abbas and British, 1622. (See 'Purchas
His Pilgrimes,' 'Travels of Marco Polo,' Hakluyt's 'Voyages.')

=Osaka=, Japan. 35N. 136E. F. by Rennio Shonin, 1495; captured by
Hideyoshi, 1580; castle secured by Iyeyasu, 1615; burnt by Tokugawa
retainers, 1868. (See Lafcadio Hearn's 'Out of the East,' Diosy's 'New
Far East,' Kipling's 'From Sea to Sea.')


=Padang=, Sumatra. 1S. 100E. First Dutch settlement in Sumatra, 1666;
captured by British, 1781; surrendered to Dutch, 1783; recaptured, 1794;
yielded to Dutch, 1814.

=Padmanabham=, Madras. 18N. 83E. British defeated and killed Rajah of
Vizianagram, 1794.

=Pakpatan= ('the holy ferry'), Punjab. 30N. 73E. Contains tomb of saint
Farid-ul-Hakkwa-ud-din. Visited by Ibn Batuta; in subjection to
Tamerlane, 1398.

=Palakkat=, Madras. 11N. 77E. Fort f. by Hyder Ali taken by British, 1768.

=Palembang=, Sumatra. 3S. 105E. Visited by Marco Polo, and contains an
alleged tomb of Alexander the Great. Taken by British, 1812; by Dutch,
1821.

=Palmyra= ('city of palms'), Syria. 34N. 39E. Supposed to have been f. by
Solomon; rebuilt by Hadrian, 130; Queen Zenobia conquered by Aurelian,
273; city taken by Arabs, 634; pillaged by Tamerlane, 1401. (See
Burton's 'Wanderings in Three Continents,' Volney's 'Voyage en Syrie et
en Egypte.')

=Pandavgarh=, Bombay. 18N. 74E. Seized by Sivaji, 1673; by Aurungzebe,
1701; by British, 1818.

=Pandharpur=, Bombay. 18N. 75E. Contains famous temple of Vishnu
incarnation.

=Pandua=, Bengal. 25N. 88E. Bp. of poet Bharat Chandra Rai. Contains tombs
of Jalal-ud-din Tabrizi and of Mir Kutb Alam.

=Panipat=, Punjab. 29N. 77E. Afghans under Ibrahim Lodi defeated by Mogols
under Baber, 1526; Afghans under Hermu defeated by Akbar, 1556; Ahmed
Shah conquered Mahrattas, 1761.

=Panjim=, Bombay. 15N. 74E. (See Sir Richard Burton's 'Goa and the Blue
Mountains.')

=Paphos=, Cyprus. 35N. 32E. Scene of conversion of Sergius Paulus by Saint
Paul. Famous for worship of Aphrodite and scene of story of Pygmalion.

=Pasargada=, Persia. 30N. 53E. Ancient capital of Persia; said to have
been f. by Cyrus, c. 555 B.C. Alleged tomb of Cyrus in vicinity.

=Patan=, Baroda. 24N. 72E. F. by Vanarajah, c. 746. Conquered by Mahmoud
of Ghazni, 1024; by Ulugh Khan, 1298. Contains many Jain temples and has
fine collection of Jain MSS.

=Patna=, Bengal. 26N. 85E. Buddha said to have assisted in foundation of
city; mentioned by Strabo, Pliny, and Arrian; contains shrine of Shah
Arzani. Entered by Clive, 1759; captured by Major Adam, 1761; massacre
of British, 1763; conspiracy of Sepoys, 1857; of Wahabis, 1864.

=Pegu=, Burma. 18N. 96E. Destroyed by Alompra, 1757; occupied by British,
1852.

=Peking= ('the northern capital'), China. 40N. 116E. Seized by Ghengis
Khan, 1215; res. of Kubla Khan, 1264; occupied by British and French,
1860; by British and Americans in Boxer rising, 1900. (See Little's 'Far
East.')

=Penukonda=, Madras. 14N. 78E. Res. of Krishna Deva. Seized by Hyder Ali,
1762.

=Perambakkam=, Madras. 13N. 80E. Hyder Ali overcame British, 1780.

=Petra=, Syria. 30N. 36E. Mentioned by Strabo and Pliny, and probably Sela
of the Bible. (See Doughty's 'Travels in Arabia Deserta,' Whittier's
'"The Rock" in El Ghor.')

=Petropavlovsk=, Kamtchatka. 53N. 159E. French and British allies engaged
in naval battle with Russians under Muravieff, 1854.

=Phyeng-yang=, Korea. 39N. 126E. Japanese won a victory over Chinese,
1894. (See Diosy's 'New Far East,' McKenzie's 'From Tokyo to Tiflis.')

=Pinjaur=, Punjab. 31N. 77E. Besieged by Patiala, 1769; taken by Bourquin,
1793.

=Plassy=, Bengal. 24N. 88E. Siraj-ud-Daula suffered great defeat at hands
of Clive, 1757. (See Malleson's 'Decisive Battles of India.')

=Pollanarrua=, Ceylon. 8N. 82E. Capital of Ceylon, 769; taken by Malabars,
c. 1204.

=Pondicherri=, Madras. 12N. 80E. First French settlement, 1674; taken by
Dutch, 1693; unsuccessfully besieged by Admiral Boscawen, 1748; taken by
Eyre Coote, 1761; restored to French, 1763; recaptured by Sir Hector
Monro, 1778; restored, 1783; retaken by British, 1793; finally restored
to French, 1816.

=Poona=, Bombay. 19N. 74E. Destroyed by Nizam Ali, 1763; captured by
British, 1818.

=Port Arthur=, Manchuria. 39N. 121E. Fortified by Chinese, 1891; seized by
Japanese, 1894; leased to Russia, 1898; besieged during Russo-Japanese
War, 1904; surrendered to Japanese, 1905. (See Diosy's 'New Far East.')

=Porto Novo=, Madras. 11N. 80E. Occupied by Danes and English, 1682; Sir
Eyre Coote defeated Hyder Ali, 1781; ceded to British by Dutch, 1823.
(See Malleson's 'Decisive Battles of India.')

=Pratapgarh=, Bombay. 18N. 74E. Res. of Sivaji, and scene of his murder of
Afzal Khan, 1659.

=Priene=, Asia Minor. 38N. 27E. One of twelve cities of Ionian League,
supposed to have been f. by Æpytus. Bp. of Bias and Achelaus.

=Prome=, Burma. 19N. 95E. Captured by British, 1825, 1852; partially
destroyed by fire, 1856.

=Pulicat=, Madras. 13N. 80E. Occupied by Dutch, 1609; conquered by
British, 1781; ceded to Dutch, 1818; to British, 1825.

=Punna=, Rajputana. 25N. 80E. Besieged by Sikander Lodi, 1494; taken by
Ram Chandra Deo, 1563. Here Pran Nath is held sacred, and his tomb
exists.

=Puri=, Bengal. 20N. 86E. Contained Gold Tooth of the Buddha for many
centuries; now famous for the temple of Vishnu in his incarnation of
Juggernaut.


=Quilon=, Madras. 9N. 77E. Visited by Marco Polo; Portuguese residents
defeated by Dutch, 1662.


=Radhanagar=, Bengal. 23N. 88E. Bp. of Ram Mohan Rai, first writer of
Bengali prose.

=Rahun=, Punjab. 31N. 76E. Believed to have been f. by Rajah Raghab. Taken
by Tara Singh, 1759.

=Rajgir=, Bengal. 25N. 85E. Visited by Fa Hian and Hiuen Tsiang.
Identified with Rajagriha, res. of Buddha. (See Sir Edwin Arnold's
'Light of Asia.')

=Rajpur= ('the royal town'), United Provs. 30N. 78E. Scene of story
entitled 'The Potter's Thumb,' by Mrs. Flora Annie Steel.

=Ramleh=, Syria. 32N. 35E. Visited by W. M. Thomson, and described in 'The
Land and the Book.' (See Volney's 'Voyage en Syrie et en Egypte.')

=Ramnad=, Madras. 9N. 79E. Captured by British, 1772.

=Ramnagar=, Punjab. 32N. 74E. Besieged by Ranjit Singh, 1795; Lord Gough
defeated Sikhs, 1848.

=Rangoon= ('the end of the war'), Burma. 17N. 96E. F. as Dagon, c. 588
B.C.; rebuilt by Alompra, 1755; captured by British, 1824, 1852. (See
Kipling's 'From Sea to Sea.')

=Ranibennur=, Bombay. 15N. 76E. Seized by Colonel Wellesley, 1800;
occupied by British, 1818.

=Rattihalli=, Bombay. 14N. 76E. Defeat of Hyder Ali by Mahrattas, 1764.

=Rawal Pindi=, Punjab. 34N. 73E. Scene of surrender of Sikhs after Sir
Hugh Gough's defeat at Gujrat, 1849.

=Rhodes=, Asia Minor. 36N. 28E. F. in 408 B.C. Citizens massacred by
Cassius, 42 B.C.; held by knights of St. John of Jerusalem, 1309;
besieged by Mohammed II., 1480; taken by Solyman the Magnificent, 1522.
Bp. of Panaetius, Stratocles, Andronicus, Eudemus, Hieronymus, Pisander,
Simmias, and Aristides. Res. of Apollonius Rhodius and Posidionius. (See
Hakluyt's 'Voyages.')

=Rohanked=, Berar. 21N. 76E. Nasir Khan defeated, 1437; Jamal Khan here
slain in battle, 1590.

=Rohtak=, Punjab. 29N. 77E. Scene of murder of Kai Khusru, c. 1286;
besieged by Khizr Khan, 1410.

=Rungpur= ('abode of bliss'), Bengal. 26N. 89E. Alleged res. of Rajah
Bhagadatta. Taken by British, 1765.


=Sabraon=, Punjab. 31N. 75E. First Sikh War ended by Sir Hugh Gough's
defeat of Sikhs, 1846. (See Malleson's 'Decisive Battles of India.')

=Safed=, Palestine. 33N. 36E. Believed by Jews Messiah will make city his
capital. Scene of siege of Holophernes and murder of Judith. Bp. of
Tobias. Castle f. by Christians, 1140; taken by Saladin, 1189; destroyed
by Sultan of Damascus, 1220; rebuilt by Templars, 1240; destroyed by
Bibars of Egypt, 1266. (See Thomson's 'Land and the Book,' Volney's
'Voyage en Syrie et en Egypte.')

=Sagandari=, Bengal. 23N. 89E. Bp. of Madhu Sudan Datta, writer of
'Meghanad-Badh' and 'Krishna Kumari.'

=Saigon=, Cochin-China. 11N. 107E. Captured by French, 1858. (See Little's
'Far East.')

=St. Thomé=, Madras. 13N. 80E. Suburb of Madras; scene of victory of
French under Paradis over Maphuz Khan, 1746. (See Malleson's 'Decisive
Battles of India.')

=Salem=, Madras. 12N. 78E. Seized by British, 1768; ceded to British by
treaty of Seringapatam, 1792.

=Samana=, Punjab. 30N. 76E. Conquered by Mohammed of Ghor, 1192; by Banda
Bairagi, 1708.

=Samaria=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. F. by Omri, 912 B.C.; captured by Sargon,
722 B.C.; by Alexander the Great, 331 B.C.; by Antiochus the Great, 203
B.C.; by John Hyrcanus, 120 B.C.; given by Augustus to Herod the Great.

=Samarkand=, Turkestan. 40N. 67E. Bp. of Nidhami-i-Arudi, author of
'Chahar Maqala.' Ancient city destroyed by Alexander the Great, 329
B.C.; conquered by Kotaiba ibn Moslim, 711; by Genghis Khan, 1220; by
Amir of Bokhara, 1504; by Russians, 1868. Contains mosque of
Shah-Zindeh, and tomb of Tamerlane. Bp. of Aboul-Mansour-Matoudiri. (See
'Travels of Marco Polo.')

=Sambhal=, United Provs. 29N. 79E. Bp. of Amir Khan.

=Samiaveram=, Madras. 11N. 78E. Occupied by Clive, 1752.

=Samsat=, Asiatic Turkey. 38N. 39E. Bp. of Bishop Paul of Samosata and of
Lucian.

=Sana=, Arabia. 15N. 45E. Capital of Yemen, captured by Turks, 1872.

=San-de-pu=, Manchuria. 42N. 123E. Unsuccessfully attacked by Russians
under General Grippenberg, 1904.

=Sanjan=, Bombay. 20N. 73E. Visited by Polish scholar, Hove, 1787. Taken
by Portuguese, 1534.

=Sante Bennur=, Madras. 14N. 76E. Taken by Hyder Ali, 1761; by Mahrattas,
1791.

=Santipur=, Bengal. 23N. 88E. Res. of Chaitanya, and bp. of Adyaita.

=Sarafand=, Syria. 33N. 35E. Ancient city, known in the Bible as
Zareptath. (See Thomson's 'Land and the Book.')

=Sardhana=, United Provs. 29N. 78E. Celebrated as res. of Begam Sumru.

=Sardis=, Asia Minor. 39N. 28E. Occupied by Cyrus, 548 B.C.; burned by
Ionians, c. 409 B.C.; destroyed by Tamerlane, 1402. Mentioned by
Æschylus and Herodotus; res. of Xerxes; contains ruins of temple of
Cybele and tomb of Alyattes.

=Sasseram= ('one thousand toys'), Bengal. 25N. 84E. Contains tombs of Sher
Shah and his father.

=Satyamangalam=, Madras. 11N. 77E. Taken by Hyder Ali, 1768; by Tippoo
Sahib, 1790.

=Savandurga=, Madras. 13N. 77E. Captured by Lord Cornwallis, 1791.

=Selefke=, Asiatic Turkey. 36N. 34E. F. by Seleucus Nicator; bp. of
Xenarchus.

=Seleucia Pieria=, Asia Minor. 36N. 36E. F. by Seleucus Nicator; captured
by Ptolemy Euergetes, 246 B.C.; by Antiochus the Great, 219 B.C.

=Seoul=, Korea. 38N. 127E. Capital of Korea since 1392. Contains fine
temple of Confucius. (See Diosy's 'New Far East,' McKenzie's 'From Tokyo
to Tiflis,' Little's 'Far East.')

=Sephora=, Palestine. 33N. 35E. Mentioned in the Bible; visited by
Lamartine, 1832.

=Seringapatam= ('city of Vishnu'), Mysore. 12N. 77E. Besieged by Lord
Cornwallis, 1792; taken by British and Tippoo Sahib killed, 1799.
Contains ancient temple of Vishnu, and tombs of Hyder Ali and Tippoo
Sahib.

=Seroda=, Bombay. 15N. 74E. Res. of Sir R. Burton; described in 'Goa and
the Blue Mountains.'

=Sha River=, Manchuria. 42N. 123E. Russians under General Kuropatkin
conquered by Japanese, 1904.

=Shahabad=, United Provs. 28N. 80E. F. by Diler Khan, whose tomb is here,
1677; visited by Bishop Heber, 1824.

=Shang-hai= ('above the sea'), China. 31N. 121E. Taken by Triads, 1853;
occupied by British and French, 1860. (See Little's 'Far East.')

=Shehr=, Arabia. 15N. 50E. City described in 'Travels of Marco Polo' as
Escier.

=Shehr-i-Sebz=, Turkestan. 39N. 67E. F. on site of Kesh, bp. of Tamerlane.

=Shimoga=, Madras. 14N. 76E. Captured by Mahrattas, 1798; destroyed by
Dhundia Wagh, 1799.

=Shimonosoki=, Japan. 34N. 131E. Bombarded by American, British, Dutch,
and French fleet, 1864; treaty signed here, 1895. (See McKenzie's 'From
Tokyo to Tiflis,' Little's 'Far East.')

=Shiraz=, Persia. 30N. 53E. F. c. 697; capital of Persia, 1760. Near by
are tombs of Saadi and Hafiz.

=Shivner=, Bombay. 19N. 74E. Bp. of Sivaji.

=Sholapur=, Bombay. 18N. 76E. The Baji Rao suffered defeat at hands of
British, 1818.

=Shwebo=, Upper Burma. 23N. 96E. Bp. of Maung Aung Zeya.

=Sidon=, Syria. 34N. 35E. Taken by Crusaders, 1110; by Saladin, 1187;
recaptured by Crusaders, 1197; destroyed by Mongols, 1260; captured by
Mussulmans, 1291; bombarded by Napier, 1840; persecution of Christians,
1860. (See Thomson's 'Land and the Book,' Volney's 'Voyage en Syrie et
en Egypte.')

=Sikandarabad=, United Provs. 28N. 78E. F. by Sikandar Lodi, 1498;
suffered during Mutiny, 1857.

=Sikandra=, United Provs. 27N. 78E. Res. of Sikandar Lodi, and contains
tomb of Akbar.

=Siloam=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Pool near Jerusalem mentioned in the Bible.
(See Mark Twain's 'New Pilgrim's Progress,' Thomson's 'Land and the
Book.')

=Simla=, Punjab. 31N. 77E. Fashionable health-resort of Europeans in
India, frequently the scene of Kipling's stories, e.g., 'Under the
Deodars,' 'The Phantom 'Rickshaw.'

=Sinai, Mount=, Arabia Petræa. 28N. 34E. Mentioned in the Bible as the
mountain on which God revealed himself to Moses. (See Flinders Petrie's
'Researches in Sinai,' also 'Purchas His Pilgrimes,' Volney's 'Voyage en
Syrie et en Egypte,' Burckhardt's 'Travels in Syria and the Holy Land.')

=Singapore=, Malay Peninsula. 1N. 104E. F. by Sir Stamford Raffles, 1819;
ceded to British by Sultan of Johore, =1824=. (See Kipling's 'From Sea to
Sea.')

=Singarh= ('lion's fort'), Bombay. 18N. 74E. Taken by Sivaji, 1647; by
Tanaji Malusre, 1670; by British, 1818.

=Singi=, Bengal. 28N. 81E. Bp. of Kasiram Das, translator into Bengali of
'Mahabharata.' (See R. C. Dutt's 'Lit. of Bengal.')

=Sinhur=, Rajputana. 23N. 77E. Jaswaut Rao here attacked Captain Jean
Baptiste Filose, 1814.

=Sinope=, Asia Minor. 42N. 35E. F. by Ionians of Miletus, 630 B.C.;
unsuccessfully attacked by Mithradates IV., 220 B.C.; captured by
Pharnaces, 183 B.C.; by Lucullus, 70 B.C.; fleet and town partially
destroyed by Russians, 1853. Bp. of Diogenes.

=Sira=, Madras. 14N. 77E. Taken by Mahrattas, 1757; by Hyder Ali;
recaptured by Mahrattas, 1766; by Tippoo Sahib, 1774.

=Sirhind=, Punjab. 31N. 76E. Sarang Khan overcome by Khizr Khan, 1420;
Bazid Khan killed by Banda Bairagi, 1708.

=Sivas=, Asiatic Turkey. 40N. 37E. Destroyed by Tamerlane, 1400.

=Skutari=, Asia Minor. 41N. 29E. Scene of Florence Nightingale's
activities during Crimean War, 1854-6; destroyed by fire, 1872.

=Smyrna=, Asia Minor. 38N. 27E. Ancient city celebrated by Pindar,
Aristides, and Himerius, containing famous relics of Homer. Destroyed by
Alyattes, c. 575 B.C.; rebuilt by Antigonus and Lysimachus, but suffered
from earthquake, 179; seized by Turks, 1084; conquered by Aidin, c.
1330; by Tamerlane, 1402. (See Kinglake's 'Eothen,' Twain's 'New
Pilgrim's Progress,' Lamartine's 'Voyage en Orient,' Montesquieu's
'Lettres Persanes.')

=Sohar=, Arabia. 24N. 57E. Visited by Marco Polo and Ibn Batatu. Occupied
by Portuguese, 1508.

=Somnath=, Bombay. 21N. 70E. Pillaged by Mahmud of Ghazni, 1025. Alleged
place in which Krishna died.

=Sopara=, Bombay. 19N. 73E. Sacred place of Buddha, and mentioned in the
'Mahabharata.'

=Su-Chau=, China. 31N. 121E. F. c. 500 B.C.; captured by Taiping rebels,
1860; became treaty-port, 1896.

=Sukkur=, Sind. 28N. 69E. Talpurs defeated by Shah Shuja, 1833; British
possession, 1842.

=Sur= ('rock'), Palestine. 33N. 35E. Ancient Tyre. Besieged by
Nebuchadnezzar II., 572 B.C.; by Alexander the Great, 332 B.C.; captured
by Crusaders, 1124; destroyed by Malik al-Ashraf, 1291; suffered from
earthquake, 1837. (See Lamartine's 'Voyage en Orient,' Thomson's 'Land
and the Book,' Volney's 'Voyage en Syrie et en Egypte,' Hakluyt's
'Voyages.')

=Surat=, Bombay. 21N. 73E. Overcome by Akbar, 1572; British settlement,
1612; under British rule, 1800. (See 'Purchas His Pilgrimes.')

=Susa=, Persia. 32N. 48E. Capital of Elamite kingdom, c. 2280 B.C.;
conquered by Assyrians, 645 B.C. Contains tomb alleged to be of Daniel.


=Tabariah=, Syria. 33N. 36E. F. by Herod Antipas, c. 16; Saladin defeated
Christians, 1187; given to France, 1240; taken by Mussulmans, 1247.
Mentioned by Josephus; contains tomb of Arabian philosopher Lokman;
Mishna compiled here, 190, and part of Talmud. (See Burckhardt's
'Travels in Syria and the Holy Land.')

=Tabor=, Mount, Palestine. 33N. 35E. Scene of assembly of army of Barak
and Deborah against Sisera; alleged scene of Christ's Transfiguration.
Gabinius overcame Jews, 53 B.C.; fortified by Malik-el-Adil, 1212;
French victory over British and Turks, 1799. (See Burckhardt's 'Travels
in Syria and the Holy Land.')

=Tabreez=, Persia. 38N. 46E. Foundation attributed to Zobeida, wife of
Haroun-al-Raschid, 791. Destroyed by Tamerlane, 1392; taken from Turks
by Nadir Shah, 1730; by Russians, 1827. The Bab here put to death, 1850.

=Taif=, Arabia. 22N. 41E. Visited by Burckhardt, and described in 'Travels
in Arabia.'

=Talwaudy=, Punjab. 32N. 75E. Village near Lahore which is bp. of Nanek,
founder of Sikh religion.

=Tanjore=, Madras. 11N. 79E. Unsuccessfully attacked by Lally, 1758; taken
by British, 1773; under British control, 1799.

=Tarsus=, Asia Minor. 37N. 35E. Traditionally f. by Sennacherib.
Meeting-place of Mark Antony and Cleopatra, 38 B.C. Contains tomb of
Sardanapalus, and is bp. of St. Paul, Athenodorus, and Hermogenes.

=Tchesme=, Asia Minor. 38N. 27E. Turkish fleet defeated by Russian under
Orloff and Elphinstowe, 1770.

=Teheran=, Persia. 36N. 51E. Treaty signed between British and Persians,
1857. Near city are ruins of Rhages, bp. of Haroun-al-Raschid.

=Teima=, Arabia. 28N. 39E. The Tema of the Bible. Visited by C. M.
Doughty, and described in 'Travels in Arabia Deserta.'

=Tekrit=, Asiatic Turkey. 35N. 44E. Bp. of Saladin.

=Tiberias, Sea of=, Palestine. 33N. 36E. Frequently mentioned in the Bible
as Lake of Galilee or Gennesaret, and by Josephus. Bp. of disciples
Simon, Andrew, James the Great, and John. Visited by Lamartine, 1832.
(See Kinglake's 'Eothen,' Twain's 'New Pilgrim's Progress,' 'Purchas His
Pilgrimes,' Adam Smith's 'Historical Geography of the Holy Land,'
Thomson's 'Land and the Book,' Burckhardt's 'Travels in Syria and the
Holy Land.')

=Tien-tsin= ('Heaven's ford'), China. 39N. 117E. Besieged by Taiping
rebels, 1853; treaty signed with French and British, 1858; occupied by
French and British, 1860; foreign inhabitants murdered, 1870; res. of Li
Hung-Chang for 20 years, 1874.

=Tokat=, Asiatic Turkey. 40N. 37E. Severely damaged by earthquake, 1825;
massacre of Armenians, 1895.

=Tokio=, Japan. 36N. 140E. Seat of government for Tokugawa Ieyasu, 1603;
eastern capital of Japan, 1868; opened to foreign res., 1869. (See
Diosy's 'New Far East,' McKenzie's 'From Tokyo to Tiflis.')

=Tomsk=, Siberia. 56N. 85E. F. in 1604; capital of Tomsk. Contains
university f. in 1888. (See Fraser's 'Real Siberia,' Tolstoi's
'Resurrection.')

=Tortosa=, Syria. 35N. 36E. Ceded to Templars, c. 1161; taken by Saladin,
1188; by Mussulmans, 1291.

=Tottori=, Japan. 36N. 134E. Visited by Lafcadio Hearn, and described in
'Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan.'

=Tranquebar=, Madras. 11N. 80E. Bought by Dutch, 1620; taken by British,
1787; sold to British, 1845.

=Trebizond= ('a table'), Asiatic Turkey. 41N. 40E. F. by Greeks from
Sinope, 700 B.C.; scene of Xenophon's retreat with ten thousand; capital
of empire of Trebizond under Alexius Comnenus, 1204; taken by Mohammed
II., 1461.

=Trichinopoli=, Madras. 11N. 79E. British possession, 1801. Contains tomb
of Bishop Heber.

=Trichoor=, Madras. 11N. 76E. Occupied by Hyder Ali, 1776; by Tippoo
Sahib, 1789.

=Trincomali=, Ceylon. 9N. 81E. Contains ruins of famous Temple of a
Thousand Columns destroyed by Portuguese, 1622. Taken by storm by
British, 1795.

=Tripoli=, Syria. 34N. 36E. Destroyed by earthquakes, 450, 550; captured
by Saracens, 638; by Crusaders, who destroyed celebrated Arabian
collection of books, 1109; by Egyptians, 1289. (See Volney's 'Voyage en
Syrie et en Egypte,' Hakluyt's 'Voyages,' Burckhardt's 'Travels in Syria
and the Holy Land.')

=Troy=, Asia Minor. 40N. 26E. Said to have been f. by Dardanus, walls
built by Apollo and Poseidon; centre of Greek legends. Visited by
Alexander the Great, 334 B.C.; Roman possession, 189 B.C.; destroyed by
Turks, 1306. (See Homer's 'Iliad,' Virgil's 'Æneid,' Tacitus' 'Annals,'
Kinglake's 'Eothen.')

=Tsing-tao=, China. 36N. 120E. Seized by Germany, 1897.

=Turkestan=, Asiatic Russia. 44N. 68E. Resort of pilgrims to mosque of
Hazret-Yassavi, built by Tamerlane. Occupied by Russian troops, 1864.


=Umarkot=, Sind. 25N. 70E. Alleged to have been f. by Umar. Bp. of Akbar.

=Ur=, Palestine. 32N. 35E. Contains ruins of temple to moon-god Sin.
Frequently mentioned in Bible, especially as spot from which Abraham's
father moved westward.

=Ura-tyube=, Russian Turkestan. 41N. 68E. Alleged to have been f. by
Cyrus; captured by Russians, 1866.

=Urfah=, Asiatic Turkey. 37N. 39E. Captured by Seljuk Turks, 1040; by
Crusaders, 1097; by Mussulmans, 1144. Ancient centre of Syrian learning;
bp. of St. Ephraim Syrus, and said to have been res. of Abraham.

=Urga=, Mongolia. 48N. 106E. Sacred city of Mongols, and is the seat of
the Kutuktu, deified Lama. Contains famous temple of Maidar. (See
Sheepshanks' 'My Life in Mongolia and Siberia.')

=Urumiyah=, Persian Armenia. 37N. 45E. Alleged bp. of Zoroaster.

=Utakamand=, Madras. 11N. 77E. Town in which Sir R. Burton resided,
described in 'Goa and the Blue Mountains.'

=Utch= ('high place'), Punjab. 29N. 71E. Contains fort built by daughter
of Deo Singh. Captured by Mahmud of Ghazni, 1006. Res. of Persian
historian, Minhaj-ud-din.


=Van=, Asiatic Turkey. 38N. 43E. Alleged to have been f. by Semiramis;
rebuilt by Van; by Valarsaces, 149 B.C.; taken by Arabs, c. 640; by
Osmanlis, 1514; by Persians, 1636; by Kurds, 1845.

=Vellore=, Madras. 13N. 79E. Said to have been f. by Bommi Reddi, c. 1274;
besieged by Mahrattas, 1676; taken by Daud Khan, 1708; Safdar Ali
murdered here by Murtaza Ali, 1742; occupied by British, 1760; by Hyder
Ali, 1780.

=Vijayanagar= ('city of victory'), Madras. 15N. 76E. F. in 1336; contains
celebrated ruins, and is famous as res. of Sayana, the Vedic
commentator.

=Vladivostok=, Asiatic Russia. 43N. 132E. Occupied by Russians, 1860; free
port, 1873; capital of Littoral, 1888. (See Fraser's 'Real Siberia,'
Little's 'Far East.')


=Wady Hammanah=, Syria. 34N. 36E. Gorge near which Lamartine lived.

=Wa-fang-kou=, Manchuria. 40N. 122E. Russians under General Stackelberg
conquered by Japanese, 1904.

=Wakayama=, Japan. 34N. 135E. Contains castle of princes of Kishu, f.
1850, and near by is temple of Kumudera, said to be f. 770.

=Wandewash=, Madras. 12N. 80E. Lally-Tollendal defeated by Sir Eyre Coote
1760.

=Wei-hai-wei=, China. 37N. 122E. Great Chinese arsenal established, 1883;
seized by Japanese, 1895; leased to British, 1898. (See Diosy's 'New Far
East.')

=Wi-ju=, Korea. 40N. 125E. Here Manchus entered Korea, 1627; Japanese
entered Manchuria, 1894, 1904. (See McKenzie's 'From Tokyo to Tiflis.')

=Wu-chang=, China. 30N. 114E. Captured by Taiping rebels, 1853.


=Yakutsk=, Eastern Siberia. 62N. 130E. F. by Cossacks, 1632.

=Yalu=, Korea. 40N. 125E. Japanese under Admiral Ito defeated Chinese
fleet at mouth of Yalu, 1894; passage forced by Japanese during
Russo-Japanese War, 1904. (See McKenzie's 'From Tokyo to Tiflis.')

=Yamaguchi=, Japan. 34N. 131E. Mission established by St. Francis Xavier,
1550.

=Yanbo=, Arabia. 24N. 38E. Landing-place for Egyptian pilgrims. (See
Burton's 'Pilgrimage to Al-Madinah and Meccah,' Burckhardt's 'Travels in
Arabia.')

=Yarkand=, Chinese Turkestan. 38N. 78E. Annexed to Chinese Empire, 1757;
captured by Dungans, 1864; recaptured by Chinese, 1877. (See 'Travels of
Marco Polo.')

=Yokasuka=, Japan. 35N. 140E. Will Adams, the English pilot, landed here,
1600; tomb in vicinity of town.

=Yokohama=, Japan. 35N. 140E. Became residential treaty port, 1858;
totally destroyed by fire, 1866. (See Lafcadio Hearn's 'Out of the East'
and 'Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan,' Kipling's 'From Sea to Sea.')


=Zebulon=, Palestine. 33N. 35E. Mentioned several times in the Bible;
visited by Lamartine, 1832.

=Zileh=, Asia Minor. 40N. 36E. Formerly celebrated for worship of Anaitis.
Here Julius Cæsar defeated Pharnaces, and uttered famous words, 'Veni,
vidi, vici.' (See Suetonius' 'De Vita Cæsarum,' I. 37.)




INDEX




INDEX


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

     B.     Bay
     C.     Cape
     G.     Gulf
     Is.    Island
     L.     Lake
     Mt.    Mountain
     Pk.    Peak
     Pen.   Peninsula
     Pt.    Point
     R.     River
     Str.   Strait
     Vol.   Volcano

_Those places marked with an asterisk (*) appear also in the Gazetteer_


                                                            PAGE
=Abakansk=, Siberia. 54N. 92E.,                               94

=Abarim Mts.=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.,                          12

=Abashiri=, Japan. 43N. 144E.,                                88

=Abazbi=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 34N. 72E.,                     58

=Abbottabad=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 34N. 73E.,                 58

=Abdon=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.,                                12

=Abel-beth-Maachah=, Pales. 33N. 36E.,                        12

=Abel Shittim=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.,                         12

[*]=Abila=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.,                             13

=Abistadah, Lake=, Afghanistan. 33N. 68E.,                    58

[*]=Abohar=, Punjab. 30N. 74E.,                               58

=Aboo Mt.=, Rajputana. 25N. 73E.,                             59

=Abra River=, Philippine Is. 18N. 120E.,                      77

=Abreojos=, East Indies. 23N. 130E.,                          75

=Abring=, Kashmir. 34N. 77E.,                                 58

=Abu Arish=, Arabia. 17N. 43E.,                               44

=Accho=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.,                                12

=Achin Prov.=, East Indies. 5N. 96E.,                         74

=Achzib=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.,                               12

=Actinia Haven=, Siberia. 76N. 98E.,                          94

[*]=Adalia=, Asia Minor. 36N. 31E.,                           46

=Adalia, Gulf of=, Asia Minor. 36N. 31E.,                     46

=Adam's Bridge=, Ceylon. 9N. 80E.,                            63

[*]=Adam's Peak=, Ceylon. 7N. 80E.,                           63

=Adana=, Asia Minor. 37N. 36E.,                               46

[*]=Aden=, Arabia. 13N. 45E.,                                 44

=Adi Is.=, East Indies. 5S. 134E.,                            75

=Adipar=, Rajputana. 29N. 74E.,                               59

=Adipur=, Rajputana. 28N. 75E.,                               59

=Adiyaman=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 38E.,                        47

[*]=Adoni=, Madras. 16N. 77E.,                                62

=Adoraim=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.,                              12

=Adullam=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.,                              12

=Aeng Pass=, Burma. 20N. 94E.,                                67

=Afioom=, Asia Minor. 38N. 30E.,                              46

=Agartulla=, Bengal. 24N. 91E.,                               61

=Agincourt Is.=, China. 26N. 122E.,                           89

[*]=Agra=, United Provs. 27N. 78E.,                           59

=Agrigan=, East Indies. 19N. 145E.,                           75

=Agung, Mt.=, Bali. 8S. 116E.,                                76

[*]=Ahmadabad=, Bombay. 23N. 73E.,                            56

[*]=Ahmadnagar=, Bombay. 19N. 75E.,                           57

=Ahmadpur=, Punjab. 29N. 71E.,                                59

=Ahmudpur=, Punjab. 28N. 70E.,                                59

=Ahor=, Persia. 39N.                                          47

=Ahwaz=, Persia. 31N. 49E.,                                   47

=Aidin=, Asia Minor. 38N. 28E.,                               46

=Aikawa=, Japan. 38N. 138E.,                                  88

=Aintab=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 37E.,                          46

=Ai-shan=, China. 38N. 121E.,                                 83

=Aivalik=, Asia Minor. 39N. 27E.,                             46

=Ajalon=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.,                               12

=Ajer Itam Bay=, Borneo. 3S. 111E.,                           76

=Ajigasawa=, Japan. 41N. 140E.,                               88

[*]=Ajmere=, Rajputana. 27N. 75E.,                            59

=Akaba=, Arabia. 30N. 35E.,                                   44

=Akanogawa=, Japan. 37N. 139E.,                               91

=Akaoka=, Japan. 34N. 134E.,                                  91

=Akaogi=, Japan. 31N. 131E.,                                  89

[*]=Akashi=, Japan. 35N. 135E.,                               91

=Akcha=, Afghanistan. 37N. 66E.,                              45

=Ak Dagh=, Asia Minor. 37N. 30E.,                             46

=Ak Dagh=, Asia Minor. 39N. 30E.,                             46

=Akhissar=, Asia Minor. 39N. 28E.,                            46

=Akhlat=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 42E.,                          47

=Aki=, Japan. 35N. 133E.,                                     91

=Akita=, Japan. 40N. 140E.,                                   88

=Akkeshi=, Japan. 43N. 145E.,                                 88

=Akkeshi Bay=, Japan. 43N. 145E.,                             88

=Ako=, Formosa. 22N. 121E.,                                   89

=Ako=, Japan. 35N. 134E.,                                     91

=Akola=, Berar. 21N. 77E.,                                    60

=Akote=, Berar. 21N. 77E.,                                    60

=Akserai=, Asia Minor. 38N. 34E.,                             46

=Akshehr=, Asia Minor. 38N. 31E.,                             46

=Aktan=, Asiatic Russia. 48N. 72E.,                           94

=Ak Tepe=, Turkestan. 36N. 62E.,                              45

=Akumi-Shima=, Lu-Chu Is. 27N. 127E.,                         89

=Akune=, Japan. 32N. 130E.,                                   89

=Akuseki Is.=, Lu-Chu Is. 30N. 130E.,                         89

=Akyab=, Burma. 20N. 93E.,                                    67

=Alabat=, Philippine Islands. 14N. 122E.,                     77

=Alacham=, Asia Minor. 42N. 36E.,                             46

=Ala Dagh=, Asia Minor. 40N. 33E.,                            46

=Aladana=, S., N.W. Frontier Provs. 35N. 72E.,                58

=Ala Kul=, Asiatic Russia. 46N. 82E.,                         94

=Alamaguan=, East Indies. 18N. 145E.,                         75

=Ala Shan=, Inner Mongolia. 38N. 106E.,                       82

=Alaya=, Asia Minor. 36N. 32E.,                               46

=Alaykan=, Burma. 20N. 95E.,                                  67

=Alazeisk Mts.=, Siberia. 67N. 150E.,                         95

=Alazeisk River=, Siberia. 71N. 154E.,                        95

=Albay=, Philippine Islands. 13N. 124E.,                      77

=Albistan=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 37E.,                        46

=Aldan, River=, Siberia. 60N. 135E.                           95

=Aldansk=, Siberia. 62N. 134E.                                95

[*]=Aleppo=, Turkey in Asia. 36N. 37E.                        46

=Aleppy=, Madras. 10N. 76E.                                   63

=Alexandretta=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 36E.                     46

=Alfonso XII.=, Philippine Is. 6N. 121E.                      77

=Alibagh=, Bombay. 19N. 73E.                                  57

[*]=Aligarh=, United Provs. 28N. 78E.                         59

=Ali Khel=, Afghanistan. 34N. 70E.                            58

=Alingar River=, Afghanistan. 35N. 70E.                       58

=Aliwal=, Punjab. 31N. 75E.                                   58

=Allahabad=, N.W. Provs. 26N. 82E.                            60

=Allahabad=, Punjab. 29N. 71E.                                59

[*]=Allahabad=, United Provs. 25N. 82E.                       60

[*]=Allah Shehr=, Asia Minor. 38N. 29E.                       46

=Allanmyo=, Burma. 19N. 95E.                                  67

=Allas Strait=, East Indies. 9S. 116E.                        74

=Almora=, United Provs. 30N. 80E.                             60

=Alon=, Burma. 22N. 95E.                                      67

=Alor Star=, Malay Pen. 6N. 100E.                             68

=Alupu Cape=, Asia Minor. 36N. 28E.                           46

=Alutgama=, Ceylon. 7N. 80E.                                  63

=Alwar=, Rajputana. 27N. 77E.                                 59

=Alwye River=, Madras. 10N. 76E.                              63

=Amadnagar=, Bombay. 24N. 73E.                                56

=Amaga, River=, Siberia. 62N. 134E.                           95

=Amakusa Nada=, Japan. 33N. 130E.                             89

=Amakusashima=, Japan. 32N. 130E.                             89

=Amallapuram=, Madras. 17N. 82E.                              62

=Amalner=, Bombay. 21N. 75E.                                  56

=Amamioshima=, Lu-Chu Is. 29N. 129E.                          89

[*]=Amarapura=, Burma. 22N. 96E.                              67

=Amarpur=, Nepal. 27N. 87E.                                   61

[*]=Amasia=, Asia Minor. 41N. 36E.                            46

=Amathus=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                               13

=Ambala=, Punjab. 30N. 77E.                                   58

=Ambgaon=, Central Provs. 20N. 80E.                           60

=Ambir=, Rajputana. 27N. 76E.                                 59

=Amblan=, Philippine Islands. 9N. 123E.                       77

=Amboina=, East Indies. 4S. 128E.                             75

=Amherst=, Burma. 16N. 98E.                                   67

=Amjerah=, Central India. 23N. 75E.                           56

=Ammon=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                                 12

[*]=Amoy=, China. 24N. 118E.                                  85

=Ampani=, Madras. 20N. 83E.                                   62

=Ampenam=, East Indies. 8S. 116E.                             74

=Amraoti=, Berar. 21N. 78E.                                   60

=Amreeli=, Bombay. 22N. 71E.                                  56

[*]=Amritsar=, Punjab. 32N. 75E.                              58

[*]=Amroha=, United Provs. 29N. 78E.                          60

=Amur=, Siberia. 52N. 132E.                                   95

=Amurang=, East Indies. 1N. 124E.                             75

=Amur, Gulf of=, Siberia. 54N. 142E.                          95

=Amur, River=, Siberia. 53N. 141E.                            95

=Anadirsk=, Siberia. 65N. 168E.                               95

=Anadyr=, Siberia. 67N. 176E.                                 95

=Anadyr, Gulf of=, Siberia. 64N. 176W.                        95

=Anadyr, River=, Siberia. 65N. 176W.                          95

=Anah=, Turkey in Asia. 34N. 42E.                             47

=Anakara Chattram=, Madras. 11N. 80E.                         63

=Anakkangean Is.=, E. Indies. 7S. 116E.                       76

=Anamalli Mt.=, Madras. 10N. 77E.                             63

=Anamba Is.=, East Indies. 3N. 106E.                          74

=Anambar=, Baluchistan. 30N. 69E.                             58

=Anamur Cape=, Asia Minor. 36N. 33E.                          46

=Anand=, Bombay. 23N. 73E.                                    56

[*]=Anantapur=, Madras. 15N. 78E.                             62

=Anaphi=, Asia Minor. 36N. 26E.                               46

=Anatayan=, East Indies. 16N. 145E.                           75

=Anathoth=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                              12

=Anatolia=, Asia Minor. 39N. 29E.                             46

=Anchorite Is.=, East Indies. 0. 145E.                        75

=Andidshan=, Turkestan. 41N. 72E.                             45

=Andjar=, Bombay. 23N. 70E.                                   56

=Andkhui=, Afghanistan. 37N. 65E.                             45

=An-dong=, Korea. 36N. 128E.                                  90

=Andrene=, Turkey in Asia. 35N. 37E.                          46

[*]=Aneysa=, Arabia. 26N. 45E.                                44

=Angara, River=, Siberia. 56N. 110E.                          94

=Ang Bay=, Indo-China. 18N. 106E.                             70

=Anger=, Java. 6S. 106E.                                      76

=Angirtu Nor=, Mongolia. 43N. 115E.                           83

[*]=Angkor=, Indo-China. 13N. 104E.                           71

[*]=Angora=, Asia Minor. 40N. 33E.                            46

=Angora, River=, Siberia. 56N. 103E.                          94

=Angul=, Bengal. 21N. 85E.                                    60

=Anguli Nor=, China. 42N. 115E.                               83

[*]=Anjengo=, Madras. 9N. 77E.                                63

=Anjer=, East Indies. 6S. 106E.                               74

=An-ju=, Korea. 40N. 126E.                                    90

=Ankkswar=, Bombay. 22N. 73E.                                 56

=Ankola=, Bombay. 15N. 74E.                                   57

=Ankula=, Siberia. 62N. 109E.                                 94

=An-min-do=, Korea. 36N. 126E.                                90

=Annam=, Indo-China. 17N. 107E.                               71

=Annie Florence Reef=, E. Indies. 5S. 113E.                   76

=Anopgarh=, Rajputana. 29N. 73E.                              59

=Anor Aeng=, Burma. 20N. 94E.                                 67

=An-ping=, Formosa. 23N. 120E.                                89

=An-shan-chan=, Manchuria. 41N. 123E.                         90

=Anson=, East Indies. 13N. 141E.                              75

=Antakia=, Turkey in Asia. 36N. 36E.                          46

[*]=Antioch=, Turkey in Asia. 36N. 36E.                       46

=Antipatris=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                            13

=Anti Taurus=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 37E.                      46

[*]=An-tung=, Manchuria. 40N. 125E.                           90

=Anuradhapura=, Ceylon. 8N. 80E.                              63

=Aomori=, Japan. 41N. 141E.                                   88

=Aparri=, Philippine Islands. 18N. 122E.                      77

=Aphek=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                                 12

=Apollonia=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                             13

=Apo Vol=, Philippine Islands. 7N. 125E.                      77

=Arab=, Palestine. 31N. 35E.                                  12

=Arabi=, Turkey in Asia. 32N. 45E.                            47

=Arabkir=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 39E.                          47

=Arad=, Palestine. 31N. 35E.                                  12

=Arafura Sea=, East Indies. 10S. 135E.                        75

=Arai=, Japan. 35N. 138E.                                     91

=Arakan Hill Tracts=, Burma. 21N. 93E.                        67

=Arakan Yoma Mts.=, Burma. 21N. 94E.                          67

[*]=Arantangi=, Madras. 10N. 79E.                             63

=Ararat, Mt.=, Turkey in Asia. 40N. 44E.                      47

=Aras River=, Persia. 40N. 48E.                               47

=Aravalli Mts.=, Rajputana. 26N. 74E.                         59

=Arconum=, Madras. 13N. 80E.                                  63

[*]=Arcot=, Madras. 13N. 79E.                                 63

=Ardabil=, Persia. 38N. 48E.                                  47

=Ardilan=, Persia. 36N.                                       47

=Ardinga=, Madras. 16N. 80E.                                  62

=Arends Is.=, East Indies. 5S. 115E.                          76

=Argaeus Mount=, Asia Minor. 38N. 35E.                        46

=Argun, River=, Siberia. 53N. 121E.                           95

=Ariakeno-ura=, Japan. 31N. 131E.                             89

=Arimathea=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                             13

=Aripo=, Ceylon. 9N. 80E.                                     63

=Arjesh=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 43E.                           47

=Armenia=, Turkey in Asia. 40N. 42E.                          47

=Aroer=, Palestine. 31N. 35E.                                 12

[*]=Arrah=, Bengal. 26N. 85E.                                 60

=Arrank=, Siam. 13N. 103E.                                    71

=Arrogant Reef=, E. Indies. 5S. 113E.                         76

=Aru Island=, East Indies. 6S. 135E.                          75

=Arut, River=, Borneo. 3S. 111E.                              76

=Arwapalli=, Haidarabad. 17N. 79E.                            62

=Asakusa Ya=, Japan. 37N. 139E.                               91

=Asama Ya=, Japan. 36N. 139E.                                 91

=Ascalon=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                               13

=Ashan=, Inner Mongolia. 41N. 108E.                           82

[*]=Ashdod=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                             12

=Ashe-ho=, Manchuria. 46N. 127E.                              90

=Asher=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                                 12

=Asheri=, Bombay. 20N. 73E.                                   57

=Ashtagram=, Mysore. 13N. 76E.                                63

=Ashtaroth=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                             13

=Asir=, Arabia. 20N. 43E.                                     44

=Aska=, Madras. 20N. 85E.                                     62

=Askabad=, Turkestan. 37N. 58E.                               45

[*]=Askelon=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                            12

=Asoh, Bay=, Malay Pen. 3N. 103E.                             69

[*]=Assaye=, Haidarabad. 20N. 76E.                            62

=Astara=, Persia. 39N. 49E.                                   47

=Astor=, Kashmir. 35N. 75E.                                   58

=Astrabad=, Persia. 37N. 55E.                                 45

=Astropalia=, Asia Minor. 36N. 27E.                           46

=Asuncion=, East Indies. 20N. 145E.                           75

=Atbasarsk=, Asiatic Russia. 52N. 68E.                        94

=Atgyn-aila=, Mongolia. 43N. 116E.                            83

[*]=Athni=, Bombay. 17N. 75E.                                 57

=Atrek River=, Persia. 37N. 54E.                              45

=Atsuta=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                   91

[*]=Attock=, Punjab. 34N. 72E.                                58

=Atto-pen=, Indo-China. 15N. 107E.                            70

=Atur=, Madras. 12N. 79E.                                     63

=Auckland, Mount=, Korea. 33N. 127E.                          90

=Aurora Bk.=, East Indies. 5S. 117E.                          76

=Aurangabad=, Haidarabad. 20N. 75E.                           62

[*]=Aurungabad=, Bengal. 26N. 90E.                            61

=Ausa=, Haidarabad. 18N. 76E.                                 62

=Auwuradah=, Madras. 18N. 83E.                                62

[*]=Ava=, Burma. 22N. 96E.                                    67

=Ava=, Persia. 36N. 49E.                                      47

=Avanashi=, Madras. 11N. 77E.                                 63

=Avid River=, East Indies. 7S. 144E.                          75

=Awa=, Japan. 34N. 134E.                                      91

=Awa=, Japan. 35N. 140E.                                      91

=Awah=, Persia. 35N. 50E.                                     47

=Awaji Sa.=, Japan. 34N. 135E.                                91

=Awoshima Island=, Japan. 38N. 139E.                          88

=Ayabe=, Japan. 35N. 135E.                                    91

[*]=Ayuthia=, Siam. 14N. 101E.                                71

=Azamgurh=, United Provs. 26N. 83E.                           60

=Azekah=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                12

=Azerbijan=, Persia. 38N. 46E.                                47

=Aziz=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 38E.                             47

=Azotus=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                13


=Baal Hazor=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                            12

=Baal-meon=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                             12

=Ba-an-susu=, Manchuria. 46N. 130E.                           90

=Baba=, East Indies. 7S. 130E.                                75

=Bab-el-Mandeb, Strait of=, Arabia. 13N. 43E.                 44

=Babelthuap=, East Indies. 8N. 135E.                          75

=Baburgan Claro=, Philippine Is. 20N. 122E.                   77

=Baburgan Is.=, Philippine Is. 19N. 122E.                     77

=Babuyanes Is.=, East Indies. 20N. 121E.                      74

[*]=Babylon=, Turkey in Asia. 33N. 45E.                       47

=Bachian=, East Indies. 1S. 126E.                             75

=Bac-lieu=, Indo-China. 9N. 106E.                             71

=Bacninh=, Indo-China. 21N. 106E.                             70

=Bacolor=, Philippine Islands. 15N. 121E.                     77

=Bacolot=, Philippine Islands. 11N. 123E.                     77

=Bactrang=, Indo-China. 10N. 106E.                            71

=Badakhshan=, Afghanistan. 37N. 70E.                          45

=Badina=, Rajputana. 28N. 74E.                                59

=Badjistan=, Persia. 34N. 59E.                                45

=Badmur=, Central Provs. 22N. 78E.                            60

[*]=Badnera=, Berar. 21N. 78E.                                60

=Badwelu=, Madras. 15N. 79E.                                  62

=Bafira=, Asia Minor. 41N. 36E.                               46

=Bagan=, Sumatra. 2N. 100E.                                   69

=Bagan Api Api=, Sumatra. 2N. 101E.                           69

=Baganga=, Philippine Islands. 7N. 127E.                      77

=Bagh=, Baluchistan. 29N. 68E.                                59

[*]=Baghdad=, Turkey in Asia. 33N. 44E.                       47

=Bagu=, Rajputana. 27N. 73E.                                  59

=Bahawalpur=, Punjab. 29N. 72E.                               59

[*]=Bahera=, Punjab. 33N. 73E.                                58

[*]=Bahraich=, United Provs. 28N. 82E.                        60

=Bahranghat=, United Provs. 27N. 82E.                         60

=Bahrein Island=, Arabia. 26N. 51E.                           45

=Bahr el Benat Is.=, Arabia. 25N. 53E.                        45

=Baiburt=, Turkey in Asia. 40N. 40E.                          47

=Baik Peninsula=, East Indies. 4S. 133E.                      75

=Baikal, Lake=, Siberia. 54N. 108E.                           94

=Baikal Mts.=, Siberia. 53N. 108E.                            94

=Bain-tuchum=, Inner Mongolia. 41N. 105E.                     82

=Bairag=, Bengal. 27N. 85E.                                   60

=Baithulwaddi=, Haidarabad. 20N. 75E.                         62

=Bakargang=, Bengal. 22N. 90E.                                61

=Bakau Mt.=, Malay Pen. 4N. 103E.                             68

=Bake, Cape=, Indo-China. 11N. 108E.                          71

=Bakhasar=, Sind. 25N. 71E.                                   59

=Bakhta River=, Siberia. 63N. 89E.                            94

=Balabac=, Philippine Islands. 8N. 117E.                      77

=Balabac Is.=, Philippine Is. 8N. 117E.                       77

=Balabac Strait, N.=, Philippine Is. 8N. 117E.                77

=Balagansk=, Siberia. 55N. 103E.                              94

=Balaghat=, Central Provs. 22N. 80E.                          60

=Bala Murghab=, Afghanistan. 36N. 63E.                        45

=Balanga=, Philippine Is. 15N. 120E.                          77

=Balangiungui=, Philippine Is. 6N. 122E.                      77

=Balante=, East Indies. 1S. 124E.                             75

=Balasinur=, Bombay. 23N. 73E.                                56

=Balasor=, Bengal. 22N. 87E.                                  61

=Balayan=, Philippine Islands. 14N. 121E.                     77

=Baler=, Philippine Islands. 16N. 122E.                       77

=Balfrush=, Persia. 36N. 53E.                                 45

=Bali=, East Indies. 9S. 115E.                                74

=Baliari=, Sind. 24N. 70E.                                    59

=Balikesri=, Asia Minor. 40N. 28E.                            46

=Baling=, Malay Peninsula. 6N. 101E.                          68

=Balipara=, Assam. 27N. 93E.                                  67

=Balipura=, Assam. 27N. 93E.                                  61

=Bali Strait=, Java. 8S. 114E.                                76

=Balkash, Lake=, As. Russia. 46N. 75E.                        94

[*]=Balkh=, Afghanistan. 37N. 67E.                            45

=Balkondah=, Haidarabad. 19N. 78E.                            62

=Ballia=, United Provs. 26N. 84E.                             60

=Balloah=, Bengal. 23N. 91E.                                  61

=Balotra=, Rajputana. 26N. 72E.                               59

=Baltistan=, Kashmir. 35N. 76E.                               58

=Balut=, Philippine Islands. 5N. 125E.                        77

=Bam=, Persia. 29N. 58E.                                      45

=Bamanwas=, Rajputana. 27N. 77E.                              59

=Bami=, Turkestan. 38N. 56E.                                  45

=Bampton Reef=, E. Indies. 5S. 115E.                          76

=Bampur=, Persia. 27N. 60E.                                   45

=Ban=, Malay Peninsula. 10N. 99E.                             71

=Banaganapalli=, Madras. 15N. 78E.                            62

=Banam=, Indo-China. 12N. 105E.                               71

=Banas River=, Rajputana. 26N. 77E.                           59

=Ban-buri=, Indo-China. 13N. 103E.                            71

=Banchar=, Java. 7S. 112E.                                    76

=Banda=, N.W. Provinces. 26N. 80E.                            60

=Banda Island=, East Indies. 5S. 128E.                        75

=Banda Sea=, East Indies. 5S. 126E.                           75

=Bandai San=, Japan. 38N. 140E.                               91

=Bandar=, Malay Peninsula. 3N. 101E.                          69

=Bandarawela=, Ceylon. 7N. 81E.                               63

=Bandar Maharami=, Malay Pen. 2N. 103E.                       69

[*]=Bander Abbas=, Persia. 27N. 56E.                          45

=Bandikui=, Rajputana. 27N. 77E.                              59

=Bandon=, Malay Peninsula. 9N. 100E.                          71

=Bandon Bight=, Malay Pen. 9N. 77E.                           71

=Bandra Las=, Sind. 24N. 70E.                                 59

=Bandung=, Java. 7S. 108E.                                    76

[*]=Bangalore=, Mysore. 13N. 78E.                             63

=Bangaya Is.=, East Indies. 2S. 122E.                         74

=Bangkalan=, Java. 7S. 113E.                                  76

=Bangkalis=, East Indies. 2N. 102E.                           74

[*]=Bangkok=, Siam. 14N. 101E.                                71

=Bang-pa-kong=, Siam. 14N. 101E.                              71

=Bang-pla-soi=, Siam. 13N. 101E.                              71

=Bang-pra=, Siam. 13N. 101E.                                  71

=Bangsdara River=, Madras. 18N. 84E.                          62

=Bang-son=, Indo-China. 14N. 109E.                            71

=Bang Tapan=, Malay Pen. 11N. 100E.                           71

=Banjermassin=, East Indies. 4S. 115E.                        74

=Banjumas=, Java. 8S. 109E.                                   76

=Banjuwangi=, Java. 8S. 114E.                                 76

=Banka Island=, East Indies. 3S. 106E.                        74

=Banki=, Bengal. 20N. 86E.                                    60

=Bankot=, Bombay. 18N. 73E.                                   57

=Bankura=, Bengal. 23N. 87E.                                  61

=Ban-muk=, Siam. 16N. 105E.                                   70

=Bannu=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 33N. 70E.                       58

=Ban-pao=, Siam. 16N. 100E.                                   70

=Bansda=, Bombay. 21N. 73E.                                   56

[*]=Bantam=, Java. 6S. 106E.                                  76

=Bantam, Cape=, Indo-China. 16N. 109E.                        70

=Banton=, Philippine Is. 13N. 122E.                           77

=Bantwal=, Madras. 13N. 75E.                                  63

=Banyumas=, East Indies. 7S. 109E.                            74

=Banyuwangi=, East Indies. 8S. 114E.                          74

=Baotsir=, Rajputana. 29N. 75E.                               59

=Bap=, Rajputana. 27N. 72E.                                   59

=Bap-nom=, Indo-China. 11N. 105E.                             71

=Baquba=, Turkey in Asia. 34N. 45E.                           47

=Baragua Point=, Burma. 16N. 95E.                             67

=Barak River=, Assam. 25N. 92E.                               61

=Barakar=, Bengal. 24N. 87E.                                  61

=Baran=, Rajputana. 25N. 76E.                                 59

[*]=Bardwan=, Bengal. 23N. 88E.                               61

[*]=Bareilly=, United Provs. 28N. 79E.                        60

=Barguzinsk=, Siberia. 54N. 110E.                             94

=Baria=, Indo-China. 10N. 107E.                               71

=Bari Doab Canal=, Punjab. 31N. 74E.                          58

=Barin=, Mongolia. 43N. 118E.                                 83

=Barisal=, Bengal. 23N. 90E.                                  61

=Barito River=, East Indies. 2S. 115E.                        74

=Barkur=, Madras. 14N. 75E.                                   63

=Barmer=, Rajputana. 26N. 71E.                                59

=Barnaul=, Siberia. 54N. 83E.                                 94

[*]=Baroda=, Bombay. 22N. 73E.                                56

=Barongan=, Philippine Is. 12N. 125E.                         77

[*]=Barrackpur=, Bengal. 23N. 88E.                            61

=Barren Island=, Korea. 35N. 126E.                            90

=Barsi=, Bombay. 18N. 76E.                                    57

=Bartan=, Asia Minor. 42N. 32E.                               46

=Barung Island=, Java. 8S. 113E.                              76

[*]=Barwani=, Central India. 22N. 75E.                        56

=Bashi Channel=, East Indies. 21N. 123E.                      74

=Bashi Island=, East Indies. 20N. 121E.                       74

=Basilan=, Philippine Islands. 6N. 122E.                      77

=Basilan Is.=, Philippine Is. 6N. 122E.                       77

=Basilan Str.=, Philippine Is. 6N. 122E.                      77

=Basim=, Berar. 20N. 77E.                                     57

=Bassak=, Indo-China. 15N. 106E.                              71

[*]=Bassein=, Bombay. 19N. 73E.                               57

=Bassein=, Burma. 17N. 95E.                                   67

=Bassein River=, Burma. 16N. 94E.                             67

=Basses, Great=, Ceylon. 6N. 81E.                             63

=Basses, Little=, Ceylon. 6N. 82E.                            63

=Bassia=, Bengal. 23N. 85E.                                   60

=Basta=, Turkey in Asia. 31N. 48E.                            47

=Bastar=, Central Provs. 19N. 81E.                            60

=Basti=, United Provinces. 27N. 83E.                          60

=Bastion, Cape=, China. 18N. 110E.                            84

=Batag=, Philippine Islands. 13N. 125E.                       77

[*]=Batala=, Punjab. 32N. 75E.                                58

=Batam Is.=, Str. of Singapore. 1N. 104E.                     69

=Batangan, Cape=, Indo-China. 15N. 109E.                      70

=Batangas=, Philippine Is. 14N. 121E.                         77

[*]=Batavia=, Java. 6S. 107E.                                 76

=Bathinda=, Punjab. 30N. 75E.                                 58

=Batil Mt.=, Malay Peninsula. 5N. 103E.                       68

=Battambang=, Indo-China. 13N. 103E.                          71

=Batticalva=, Ceylon. 8N. 82E.                                63

=Batu=, East Indies. 4N. 96E.                                 74

=Batu Bar=, Malay Pen. 3N. 103E.                              69

=Batu Island=, East Indies. 0. 98E.                           74

=Batu Pahat=, Malay Pen. 2N. 103E.                            69

=Batur, Mount=, Bali. 8S. 116E.                               76

=Baun River=, Rajputana. 27N. 77E.                            59

=Bawean Is.=, East Indies. 6S. 113E.                          76

=Bay Lake=, Philippine Is. 14N. 121E.                         77

=Bayan Aulsk=, As. Russia. 51N. 76E.                          94

=Bayan-Mu=, Manchuria. 46N. 128E.                             90

=Bayan-su-su=, Manchuria. 46N. 127E.                          90

=Bayard, Fort=, China. 21N. 110E.                             84

=Bayas=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 36E.                            46

[*]=Bayazid=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 44E.                       47

=Bear Island=, Siberia. 71N. 164E.                            95

=Beawar=, Rajputana. 26N. 74E.                                59

=Beayan=, Philippine Islands. 7N. 124E.                       77

=Beeroth=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                               12

[*]=Beer-Sheba=, Palestine. 31N. 35E.                         12

=Begum=, Rajputana. 25N. 75E.                                 59

[*]=Behar=, Bengal. 25N. 86E.                                 60

=Behesni=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 38E.                          47

=Bei D.=, Asia Minor. 36N. 31E.                               46

=Beibasar=, Asia Minor. 40N. 32E.                             46

=Beishehr=, Asia Minor. 38N. 32E.                             46

=Beitarki River=, Bengal. 21N. 87E.                           61

=Beji River=, Baluchistan. 30N. 68E.                          58

=Bekal=, Madras. 12N. 75E.                                    63

=Bekok=, Malay Peninsula. 2N. 103E.                           69

[*]=Bela=, Baluchistan. 26N. 66E.                             45

[*]=Belgaum=, Bombay. 16N. 75E.                               57

[*]=Bellary=, Madras. 15N. 77E.                               62

=Belloor=, Mysore. 13N. 77E.                                  63

[*]=Benares=, N.W. Provinces. 25N. 83E.                       60

=Bendamurlanka=, Madras. 16N. 82E.                            62

=Bengal, Bay of=, Bengal. 18N. 90E.                           67

[*]=Bencoolen=, East Indies. 4S. 102E.                        74

=Bengawanior=, Java. 7S. 112E.                                76

=Bengkalis=, Malacca Strait. 2N. 102E.                        69

=Beni=, Rajputana. 29N. 75E.                                  59

=Bennet Land=, Siberia. 76N. 148E.                            95

=Bentinck Island=, Burma. 12N. 98E.                           71

=Bentong River=, Malay Pen. 3N. 102E.                         69

=Bera River=, Malay Peninsula. 3N. 102E.                      69

=Berba River=, Malay Pen. 3N. 103E.                           69

=Berembun=, Malay Peninsula. 3N. 103E.                        69

[*]=Berezov=, Siberia. 64N. 65E.                              94

[*]=Berghama=, Asia Minor. 39N. 27E.                          46

[*]=Berhampur=, Madras. 19N. 85E.                             62

=Bering Strait=, Siberia. 68N. 172W.                          95

=Berlin Harbour=, East Indies. 3S. 142E.                      75

=Bernam River=, Malay Pen. 4N. 101E.                          69

=Beru=, Rajputana. 27N. 72E.                                  59

=Besar=, Bawean. 6S. 113E.                                    76

=Besar Mt.=, Malay Peninsula. 5N. 101E.                       68

=Besuki=, Java. 8S. 114E.                                     76

=Besut, River=, Malay Pen. 6N. 103E.                          68

=Bethabara=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                             13

[*]=Bethany=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                            13

=Beth-arbel=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                            12

=Beth Dagon=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                            12

[*]=Bethel=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                             12

=Beth Haran=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                            12

[*]=Beth-horon=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                         13

=Beth Jeshimoth=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                        12

[*]=Bethlehem=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                          12

[*]=Bethlehem=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                          12

=Beth-Nimrah=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                           12

=Bethsaida=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                             13

=Bethshan=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                              12

=Beth Shemesh=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                          12

=Beth Tappuah=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                          12

=Bethzur=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                               12

=Betowa R.=, Central India. 26N. 80E.                         60

=Bettia=, Bengal. 27N. 84E.                                   60

=Betul=, Central Provinces. 22N. 78E.                         60

=Beypoor River=, Madras. 11N. 76E.                            63

=Beypur=, Madras. 11N. 76E.                                   63

=Beyt=, Bombay. 22N. 69E.                                     56

=Bezek=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                 12

=Bezwada=, Madras. 16N. 81E.                                  62

=Bhadar=, Bombay. 22N. 70E.                                   56

=Bhadarwa=, Kashmir. 33N. 76E.                                58

=Bhadrachalam=, Madras. 18N. 81E.                             62

[*]=Bhagalpur=, Bengal. 25N. 87E.                             61

=Bhakar=, Punjab. 32N. 71E.                                   58

=Bhamo=, Burma. 24N. 97E.                                     67

=Bhandara=, Central Provs. 21N. 80E.                          60

[*]=Bhartpur=, Rajputana. 27N. 78E.                           59

[*]=Bhatner=, Punjab. 30N. 74E.                               58

=Bhawalgarh=, Punjab. 30N. 73E.                               58

=Bhawani River=, Madras. 12N. 78E.                            63

[*]=Bhilsa=, Rajputana. 24N. 78E.                             60

=Bhima River=, Haidarabad. 16N. 77E.                          62

=Bhind River=, United Provs. 26N. 79E.                        60

=Bhir=, Haidarabad. 19N. 76E.                                 62

=Bhiwani=, Punjab. 29N. 76E.                                  59

=Bhopal=, Central India. 23N. 78E.                            60

=Bhor=, Bombay. 18N. 74E.                                     57

=Bhor Ghat=, Bombay. 19N. 73E.                                57

[*]=Bhuj=, Bombay. 23N. 70E.                                  56

=Bhusawal=, Bombay. 21N. 76E.                                 56

=Biak=, East Indies. 1S. 136E.                                75

=Bias= Bay, China. 22N. 115E.                                 85

=Bias River=, Punjab. 31N. 75E.                               58

=Bichiu=, Japan. 35N. 133E.                                   91

[*]=Bidar=, Haidarabad. 18N. 78E.                             62

=Bien Ho=, Indo-China. 13N. 104E.                             71

=Bien-hoa=, Indo-China. 11N. 107E.                            71

=Bien-son Is.=, Indo-China. 19N. 106E.                        70

=Bigha=, Asia Minor. 40N. 27E.                                46

=Bihac=, Punjab. 30N. 74E.                                    58

[*]=Bijapur=, Bombay. 17N. 76E.                               57

=Bijapur=, Nepal. 27N. 88E.                                   61

=Bijnaur=, United Provs. 29N. 78E.                            60

=Bijowar=, Central India. 24N. 79E.                           60

=Bikampur=, Rajputana. 28N. 72E.                              59

=Bikaner=, Rajputana. 28N. 73E.                               59

=Bikna Thori=, United Provs. 28N. 84E.                        60

=Bila River=, Sumatra. 2N. 100E.                              69

=Bilaspur=, Central Provs. 22N. 82E.                          60

=Bilgi=, Bombay. 14N. 75E.                                    57

=Bilin=, Burma. 17N. 97E.                                     67

=Billiton=, East Indies. 3S. 107E.                            74

=Bimi=, East Indies. 8S. 119E.                                74

[*]=Bimlipatam=, Madras. 18N. 83E.                            62

=Bingat=, East Indies. 1S. 102E.                              74

=Bingo=, Japan. 35N. 133E.                                    91

=Bingol Dagh=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 42E.                      47

=Binh-dinh=, Indo-China. 14N. 109E.                           71

=Binh Thuan=, Indo-China. 11N. 109E.                          71

=Bintula=, East Indies. 3N. 113E.                             74

=Bink-kang Bay=, Indo-China. 12N. 109E.                       71

=Bintang Is.=, Str. of Singapore. 1N. 104E.                   69

=Bird Island=, East Indies. 16N. 145E.                        75

=Birejik=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 38E.                          47

=Birjand=, Persia. 33N. 59E.                                  45

=Birsilpur=, Rajputana. 28N. 72E.                             59

=Biru=, Japan. 42N. 143E.                                     88

=Birur=, Mysore. 14N. 76E.                                    63

=Birwi=, Rajputana. 28N. 74E.                                 59

=Bisa=, Burma. 27N. 96E.                                      67

=Bisalnagar=, Bombay. 24N. 73E.                               56

=Bishnapur=, Bengal. 23N. 87E.                                61

=Bislig=, Philippine Islands. 8N. 126E.                       77

=Bismarck Archipelago=, East Indies. 3S. 148E.                75

[*]=Bitlis=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 42E.                        47

=Bitul River=, Malay Peninsula. 3N. 102E.                     69

=Biwa Ko=, Japan. 35N. 136E.                                  91

=Bizen=, Japan. 35N. 134E.                                    91

=Black Mts.=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 35N. 73E.                  58

=Black River=, Indo-China. 21N. 105E.                         70

=Black Sea.= 43N. 31E.                                        46

=Blagovehansk=, Siberia. 50N. 127E.                           95

=Blambangan Pen.=, Java. 9S. 114E.                            76

=Blimbing Mountains, Malay Pen.= 5N. 102E.                    68

=Blitar=, Java. 8S. 112E.                                     76

=Blonde Island=, Manchuria. 39N. 123E.                        90

=Blora=, Java. 7S. 111E.                                      76

=Blue Mountains=, Assam. 23N. 93E.                            67

=Bluff Point=, Burma. 18N. 94E.                               67

=Blumut, Great=, Malay Pen. 2N. 104E.                         69

=Boa-lam=, China. 22N. 107E.                                  84

=Boath=, Haidarabad. 19N. 78E.                                62

=Bod=, Bengal. 21N. 84E.                                      60

[*]=Bodinayakkanur=, Madras. 10N. 77E.                        63

=Bodune=, Manchuria. 45N. 125E.                               90

=Boelang Besar=, Malacca Str. 1N. 104E.                       69

=Bogeador C.=, Philippine Is. 18N. 121E.                      77

=Bogra=, Bengal. 25N. 89E.                                    61

=Boguchansk=, Siberia. 58N. 98E.                              94

=Bohol=, Philippine Islands. 10N. 124E.                       77

=Bokan=, Afghanistan. 34N. 68E.                               58

[*]=Bokhara=, Bokhara. 40N. 65E.                              45

=Bokie=, Burma. 22N. 93E.                                     67

=Bojeador C.=, East Indies. 19N. 120E.                        74

=Bolan Junction=, Baluchistan. 30N. 68E.                      58

=Bolan Pass=, Baluchistan. 30N. 67E.                          58

=Bolio=, East Indies. 6S. 124E.                               75

=Boloven=, Indo-China. 15N. 107E.                             70

=Bolsheretsk=, Siberia. 53N. 157E.                            95

=Boly=, Asia Minor. 41N. 31E.                                 46

[*]=Bombay=, Bombay. 19N. 73E.                                57

=Bo-mu=, Inner Mongolia. 39N. 107E.                           82

=Bongon=, East Indies. 7N. 116E.                              74

=Boni=, East Indies. 5S. 120E.                                74

=Bontaeng=, East Indies. 6S. 120E.                            74

=Bookit Duri=, Malay Pen. 3N. 103E.                           69

=Bookit Sablah=, Malay Pen. 6N. 101E.                         68

=Bookit Serudom=, Malay Pen. 4N. 103E.                        69

=Bookit Tung=, Malay Pen. 7N. 101E.                           68

=Boompjes Is.=, East Indies. 6S. 108E.                        76

=Boreyda=, Arabia. 27N. 45E.                                  44

=Borikan=, Indo-China. 19N. 104E.                             70

=Borneo=, East Indies. 0. 113E.                               74

=Borneo, British N.=, E. Indies. 6N. 116E.                    74

=Borobalgassun=, Inner Mongolia. 38N. 108E.                   82

=Borzon=, Inner Mongolia. 43N. 105E.                          82

=Bostan=, Baluchistan. 30N. 67E.                              58

=Boudrouet Rock=, Formosa. 24N. 123E.                         89

=Boulgourlou=, Asia Minor. 37N. 35E.                          46

=Bowringpet=, Mysore. 13N. 78E.                               63

=Brahmaputra R.=, Bengal. 24N. 90E.                           61

=Brindaban=, United Provs. 28N. 78E.                          59

[*]=Broach=, Bombay. 22N. 73E.                                56

=Brosot=, Java. 8S. 110E.                                     76

=Brothers Is.=, The, Malacca Strait. 3N. 100E.                69

=Broughton Bay=, Korea. 39N. 128E.                            90

=Broughton Strait=, Japan. 35N. 129E.                         89

=Brouwer Strait=, Sumatra. 1N. 102E.                          69

=Bruit=, East Indies. 3S. 111E.                               74

=Brunei=, East Indies. 5N. 115E.                              74

[*]=Brusa=, Turkey in Asia. 40N. 29E.                         46

=Bua Sum=, Siam. 15N. 101E.                                   70

=Bubbaie R.=, United Provs. 28N. 81E.                         60

=Bubdar=, Asia Minor. 38N. 30E.                               46

=Bubian Island=, Persian Gulf. 30N. 48E.                      44

=Bucas=, Philippine Islands. 10N. 126E.                       77

=Budihaul=, Mysore. 14N. 76E.                                 63

=Budra River=, Mysore. 14N. 76E.                              63

[*]=Budrum=, Asia Minor. 37N. 27E.                            46

=Budulla=, Ceylon. 7N. 81E.                                   63

=Bugti Country=, Baluchistan. 29N. 69E.                       59

=Buitenzorg=, Java. 7S. 107E.                                 76

=Bukit Batu=, Sumatra. 1N. 102E.                              69

=Bulacan=, Philippine Islands. 15N. 121E.                     77

=Bulangan=, East Indies. 3N. 117E.                            74

=Bulawadin=, Asia Minor. 39N. 31E.                            46

=Buldana=, Berar. 20N. 76E.                                   60

=Buleleng=, East Indies. 8S. 115E.                            74

=Bulghar Dagh=, Asia Minor. 37N. 34E.                         46

=Bulsar=, Bombay. 21N. 73E.                                   56

=Buluan Lake=, Mindanao, Philippine Is. 6N. 125E.             77

=Bulun=, Siberia. 70N. 126E.                                  95

=Bu-mu-ba Lake=, China. 42N. 113E.                            82

=Bunarbashi=, Asia Minor. 40N. 26E.                           46

=Bunauan=, Mindanao, Philippine Is. 8N. 126E.                 77

=Bundelcund=, Central India. 25N. 79E.                        60

=Bundi=, Rajputana. 25N. 75E.                                 59

=Bungo Strait=, Japan. 33N. 132E.                             89

=Buni=, Bombay. 24N. 70E.                                     56

=Bunji=, Kashmir. 35N. 75E.                                   58

=Bunli=, Rajputana. 26N. 76E.                                 59

=Burghi=, Bombay. 17N. 76E.                                   57

=Burgusto-ula=, Inner Mongolia. 40N. 105E.                    82

[*]=Burhanpur, Central Provinces.= 21N. 76E.                  56

=Burhi=, Bengal. 24N. 85E.                                    60

=Burias=, Philippine Islands. 13N. 123E.                      77

=Burka=, Arabia. 24N. 58E.                                    45

=Bursi=, Kashmir. 35N. 78E.                                   58

=Buru=, East Indies. 4S. 126E.                                75

=Buru Cape=, East Indies. 2N. 103E.                           74

=Burujird=, Persia. 34N. 49E.                                 47

=Burwahnugur=, Bengal. 23N. 84E.                              60

=Burwalla=, Bombay. 22N. 72E.                                 56

=Busk=, Siberia. 53N. 85E.                                    94

=Busuanga=, Philippine Is. 12N. 120E.                         77

=Buton Island=, East Indies. 7N. 99E.                         75

=Butuan=, Philippine Islands. 9N. 126E.                       77

=Butulan Vol=., Philippine Is. 6N. 126E.                      77


=Caboosa Island=, Burma. 13N. 98E.                            71

=Cabul=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                                 12

=Cabuly Pt.=, Philippine Is. 12N. 119E.                       77

[*]=Cæsarea=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                            13

=Cæsarea Philippi=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                      13

=Cagayan R.=, Philippine Is. 8N. 125E.                        77

=Cagayanes Is.=, Philippine Is. 9N. 122E.                     77

=Cagua Vol.=, Philippine Is. 18N. 122E.                       77

=Calaguas Is.=, Philippine Is. 15N. 123E.                     77

=Calamian=, Philippine Is. 12N. 120E.                         77

=Calamianes=, Philippine Is. 12N. 120E.                       77

=Calar River=, Bombay. 20N. 75E.                              57

=Calayan=, Philippine Is. 19N. 122E.                          77

=Calbayog=, Philippine Is. 12N. 125E.                         77

[*]=Calcutta=, Bengal. 23N. 88E.                              61

[*]=Calicut=, Madras. 11N. 76E.                               63

=Calimere Point=, Madras. 10N. 80E.                           63

=Calingapatam=, Madras. 18N. 84E.                             62

=Callianee=, Haidarabad. 18N. 77E.                            62

=Calpi=, United Provinces. 26N. 80E.                          60

=Camao Cape=, Indo-China. 9N. 105E.                           71

=Camarines=, Philippine Is. 13N. 123E.                        77

=Ca-mau=, Indo-China. 9N. 105E.                               71

[*]=Cambay=, Bombay. 22N. 73E.                                56

=Cambay, Gulf of=, Bombay. 21N. 72E.                          56

=Cambodia=, Indo-China. 12N. 105E.                            71

=Cam-hoa=, Indo-China. 22N. 106E.                             70

=Camiguin=, Philippine Is. 19N. 122E.                         77

=Camotes Is.=, Philippine Is. 11N. 124E.                      77

=Campbellpur=, Punjab. 34N. 72E.                              58

=Camranh Har.=, Indo-China. 12N. 109E.                        71

[*]=Cana=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                               13

=Candavi=, Bombay. 21N. 73E.                                  56

=Candaya Is.=, Philippine Is. 15N. 121E.                      77

[*]=Cannanore=, Madras. 12N. 75E.                             63

=Canning Town=, Bengal. 22N. 89E.                             61

=Cantho=, Indo-China. 10N. 106E.                              71

[*]=Canton=, China. 23N. 113E.                                85

=Canton River=, China. 22N. 114E.                             85

=Cao-bang=, Indo-China. 22N. 106E.                            70

=Cao-sorol=, Indo-China. 18N. 106E.                           70

[*]=Capernaum=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                          13

=Capitolias=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                            13

=Capiz=, Philippine Islands. 11N. 122E.                       77

=Caraga=, Philippine Islands. 7N. 127E.                       77

=Cardamum Mts.=, Madras. 10N. 77E.                            63

=Carmel=, Palestine. 31N. 35E.                                12

[*]=Carmel, Mount=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                      12

=Caroline Is.=, East Indies. 9N. 140E.                        75

=Carteret Reef=, East Indies. 3N. 135E.                       75

=Castries Bay=, Siberia. 52N. 141E.                           95

=Catanduanes=, Philippine Is. 14N. 124E.                      77

=Catbalongan=, Philippine Is. 12N. 125E.                      77

=Catel Viejo= (S. Nicolas), Philippine Is. 8N. 127E.          77

=Cauli River=, Bombay. 15N. 74E.                              57

=Cauvery River=, Madras. 11N. 80E.                            63

=Cavite=, Philippine Islands. 15N. 121E.                      77

[*]=Cawnpur=, United Provs. 26N. 80E.                         60

=Cayan=, Philippine Islands. 17N. 121E.                       77

=Celebes=, East Indies. 4S. 121E.                             74

=Celebes Sea=, East Indies. 4N. 120E.                         74

=Ceram=, East Indies. 4S. 130E.                               75

=Chahar=, China. 42N. 114E.                                   83

=Chaiapun=, Siam. 16N. 102E.                                  70

=Chaibassa=, Bengal. 22N. 86E.                                60

=Chainat=, Siam. 15N. 100E.                                   70

=Chaiya=, Malay Peninsula. 9N. 99E.                           71

=Chakar River=, Baluchistan. 30N. 68E.                        58

=Chakdara=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 35N. 72E.                    58

=Chakesar=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 35N. 73E.                    58

=Chakwal=, Punjab. 33N. 73E.                                  58

=Cha-ling=, China. 27N. 114E.                                 85

=Chalo=, Mongolia. 44N. 120E.                                 83

=Chamar=, Kashmir. 33N. 78E.                                  58

=Chamba=, Punjab. 33N. 76E.                                   58

=Chamlung=, Kashmir. 35N. 78E.                                58

=Chana=, Malay Peninsula. 7N. 101E.                           68

=Chanagur=, Central Provs. 19N. 80E.                          60

[*]=Chanar=, Bengal. 25N. 83E.                                60

=Chance Island=, Malay Pen. 9N. 98E.                          71

=Chanda=, Central Provs. 20N. 79E.                            60

[*]=Chandaur=, Bombay. 20N. 74E.                              56

=Chandaur Chain=, Bombay. 20N. 75E.                           56

=Chandausi=, United Provs. 29N. 79E.                          60

[*]=Chandernagore=, Bengal. 23N. 88E.                         61

=Chandode=, Bombay. 22N. 73E.                                 56

=Chandpur=, Bengal. 23N. 91E.                                 61

=Chandra River=, Kashmir. 33N. 75E.                           58

=Chang-chau=, China. 32N. 120E.                               85

=Chang-chau=, China. 24N. 118E.                               85

=Chang-chun=, Manchuria. 44N. 125E.                           90

=Chang-chwen Is.=, China. 21N. 113E.                          85

=Chang-hs-tao=, China. 40N. 121E.                             83

=Chang-hwa=, China. 19N. 109E.                                84

=Chang-i=, China. 37N. 120E.                                  83

=Chang-jin=, Korea. 41N. 127E.                                90

=Chang-kia-kau=, China. 41N. 115E.                            83

=Chang-kwan-tsai=, Manchuria. 45N. 129E.                      90

=Chang-le=, China. 30N. 111E.                                 84

=Chang-lo=, China. 24N. 116E.                                 85

=Chang-lo=, China. 26N. 120E.                                 85

=Chang-ning=, China. 25N. 116E.                               85

=Chang-pai-shan=, Manchuria. 42N. 127E.                       90

=Chang-ping=, China. 26N. 118E.                               85

=Chang-ping=, China. 40N. 116E.                               83

=Chang-pu=, China. 24N. 118E.                                 85

=Chang-sha=, China. 23N. 115E.                                85

=Chang-sha=, China. 28N. 113E.                                85

=Chang-shan-tao=, China. 38N. 121E.                           83

=Chang-te=, China. 29N. 111E.                                 84

=Chang-te=, China. 36N. 114E.                                 83

=Chang-tsing=, China. 36N. 117E.                              83

=Chang-tu=, Manchuria. 43N. 124E.                             90

=Chang-yang=, China. 30N. 111E.                               84

=Chaniot=, Punjab. 32N. 73E.                                  58

=Chan-sha=, China. 32N. 121E.                                 83

=Chantabun=, Siam. 13N. 102E.                                 71

=Chantakam=, Siam. 14N. 102E.                                 71

=Chao=, China. 38N. 115E.                                     83

=Chao-chau=, China. 24N. 117E.                                85

=Chao-king=, China. 23N. 112E.                                84

=Chao-lien-tao=, China. 36N. 121E.                            83

=Chao-yang=, China. 23N. 117E.                                85

=Chao-yang=, China. 42N. 120E.                                83

=Chapel Island=, China. 24N. 118E.                            85

=Chapra=, Bengal. 26N. 84E.                                   60

=Charjui=, Turkestan. 39N. 63E.                               45

=Charles Louis Mts.=, E. Indies. 4S. 136E.                    75

=Charuk Su=, Turkey in Asia. 41N. 40E.                        47

=Chatarpur=, Central India. 25N. 80E.                         60

=Chatrapur=, Madras. 19N. 85E.                                62

=Chattisgarh=, Central Provs. 21N. 83E.                       60

=Chaturat=, Siam. 16N. 102E.                                  70

=Chau-dok=, Indo-China. 11N. 105E.                            71

=Chau-hu=, China. 32N. 117E.                                  85

=Chaukan Point=, Burma. 27N. 97E.                             67

=Chau-tung=, China. 27N. 104E.                                84

=Che-cheng=, China. 34N. 116E.                                83

=Cheduba=, Burma. 19N. 94E.                                   67

=Cheduba Island=, Burma. 19N. 94E.                            67

=Che-ju=, Korea. 34N. 126E.                                   90

=Che-Kiang=, China. 29N. 120E.                                85

=Chek-jem Island=, Korea. 37N. 126E.                          90

=Chel-La, North=, Korea. 36N. 127E.                           90

=Chel-La, South=, Korea. 35N. 126E.                           90

=Chelong=, Indo-China. 12N. 106E.                             71

=Chelyuskin Cape=, Siberia. 77N. 102E.                        94

[*]=Chemulpo=, Korea. 37N. 127E.                              90

=Chenab River=, Punjab. 29N. 71E.                             59

=Chen-chau=, China. 28N. 110E.                                84

=Chen-chau=, China. 34N. 115E.                                83

=Chendras=, Malay Peninsula. 2N. 102E.                        69

=Chen-feng=, China. 25N. 106E.                                84

=Cheng=, China. 35N. 114E.                                    83

[*]=Chengalput=, Madras. 13N. 80E.                            63

=Cheng-ju=, Korea. 37N. 127E.                                 90

=Cheng-ju=, Korea. 40N. 125E.                                 90

=Cheng-kau=, China. 32N. 109E.                                84

=Cheng-ngan=, China. 28N. 107E.                               84

=Cheng-pu=, China. 26N. 110E.                                 84

=Cheng-shan=, China. 38N. 123E.                               83

=Cheng-te=, China. 41N. 118E.                                 83

=Cheng-ting=, China. 38N. 115E.                               83

=Cheng-tu=, China. 31N. 104E.                                 84

=Chen-hiung=, China. 27N. 105E.                               84

=Chen-hsi=, China. 28N. 110E.                                 84

=Chen-ju=, Korea. 36N. 127E.                                  90

=Chen-kiang=, China. 32N. 119E.                               83

=Chen-ngan=, China. 23N. 106E.                                84

=Chen-ping=, China. 25N. 116E.                                85

=Chen-yiien=, China. 27N. 108E.                               84

=Chen-yiien=, China. 36N. 107E.                               82

=Chepon=, Indo-China. 17N. 106E.                              70

=Cheribon=, Java. 7S. 109E.                                   76

=Cherrapunji=, Assam. 25N. 92E.                               61

=Che-yang-pau=, China. 27N. 120E.                             85

=Chhang-seng=, Korea. 40N. 125E.                              90

=Chhindwara=, Central Provs. 22N. 79E.                        60

=Chho-san=, Korea. 41N. 126E.                                 90

=Chhota Udepur=, Bombay. 22N. 74E.                            56

=Chhun-chhen=, Korea. 38N. 128E.                              90

=Chhung=, Korea. 37N. 128E.                                   90

=Chhung-Chheng, E.=, Korea. 36N. 127E.                        90

=Chhung-Chheng, W.=, Korea. 36N. 126E.                        90

=Chiamis=, Java. 7S. 108E.                                    76

=Chiba=, Japan. 36N. 140E.                                    91

=Chiburi=, Japan. 36N. 133E.                                  91

=Chicacole=, Madras. 18N. 84E.                                62

=Chichalengha=, Java. 7S. 108E.                               76

=Chi-chau=, China. 31N. 117E.                                 85

=Chichawatu=, Punjab. 30N. 73E.                               58

=Chi-cheng=, China. 41N. 116E.                                83

=Chidzu=, Japan. 35N. 134E.                                   91

=Chieng-hai=, Siam. 20N. 100E.                                70

=Chieng Kong=, Siam. 20N. 100E.                               70

=Chieng Mai=, Siam. 19N. 99E.                                 70

=Chieng Saan=, Siam. 20N. 100E.                               70

=Chi-feng=, China. 42N. 118E.                                 83

[*]=Chi-fu=, China. 38N. 122E.                                83

=Chigar Sarai=, Afghanistan. 35N. 71E.                        58

=Chijulang=, Java. 8S. 108E.                                  76

=Chi-kau=, China. 39N. 118E.                                  83

=Chik-ching=, China. 22N. 110E.                               84

=Chikmagalur=, Mysore. 13N. 76E.                              63

=Chilachap=, Java. 8S. 109E.                                  76

=Chilas=, Kashmir. 35N. 74E.                                  58

=Chilaw=, Ceylon. 8N. 80E.                                    63

=Chi-li=, China. 40N. 117E.                                   83

=Chi-li, Gulf of=. 39N. 119E.                                 83

=Chi-li, Strait of=. 38N. 121E.                               83

=Chilka Lake=, Bengal. 20N. 85E.                              60

[*]=Chillianwallah=, Punjab. 33N. 74E.                        58

=Chi-lung=, China. 23N. 115E.                                 85

=Chimishgadsek=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 39E.                    47

=Chin Hills State=, Burma. 23N. 94E.                          67

=China Bakier River=, Burma. 16N. 96E.                        67

=China Sea, S.=, Indo-China. 9N. 108E.                        71

=Chin-do=, Korea. 35N. 126E.                                  90

=Chindwin River=, Burma. 22N. 95E.                            67

=Chindwin Shan States=, Burma. 26N. 96E.                      67

=Chin-hai=, China. 30N. 121E.                                 85

=Chini=, Punjab. 32N. 78E.                                    58

=Chin-ju=, Korea. 35N. 128E.                                  90

=Chinnampo=, Korea. 39N. 125E.                                90

=Chinnereth, Sea of=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                    12

=Chinur=, Haidarabad. 19N. 80E.                               62

=Chiokai-san=, Japan. 39N. 140E.                              88

=Chiremai=, Java. 7S. 108E.                                   76

=Chisloth Tabor=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                        12

=Chitaldrug=, Mysore. 14N. 76E.                               63

=Chitor=, Rajputana. 25N. 75E.                                59

=Chitral=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 36N. 72E.                     58

=Chitral R.=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 36N. 72E.                  58

[*]=Chittagong=, Burma. 22N. 92E.                             61

=Chittapet=, Madras. 12N. 79E.                                63

=Chittur=, Madras. 11N. 77E.                                  63

=Chittur=, Madras. 13N. 79E.                                  63

=Chivril=, Asia Minor. 38N. 30E.                              46

=Choatilloh=, Sind. 26N. 69E.                                 59

=Cho-bo=, Indo-China. 21N. 105E.                              70

=Chobr=, China. 41N. 113E.                                    82

=Cho-chau=, China. 40N. 116E.                                 83

=Cho-don=, Indo-China. 18N. 107E.                             70

=Cholar=, Indo-China. 10N. 107E.                              71

=Chon-kan=, Indo-China. 14N. 104E.                            71

=Chorazin=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                              13

=Choreshiri Island=, Japan. 44N. 141E.                        88

=Choshi=, Japan. 36N. 141E.                                   91

=Choshjal=, China. 42N. 114E.                                 83

=Chotiali=, Baluchistan. 30N. 69E.                            58

=Chotun=, Rajputana. 26N. 71E.                                59

=Chou-tsun=, China. 37N. 118E.                                83

=Chu=, China. 32N. 118E.                                      83

=Chu-chau=, China. 28N. 120E.                                 85

=Chu-cheng=, China. 36N. 120E.                                83

=Chukairei Mt.=, Formosa. 24N. 121E.                          89

=Chu-ki=, China. 30N. 120E.                                   85

=Chumay Bay=, Indo-China. 16N. 108E.                          70

=Chung=, China. 30N. 108E.                                    84

=Chung-chang=, China. 37N. 104E.                              82

=Chung-kia-kau=, China. 37N. 116E.                            83

=Chung-king=, China. 29N. 106E.                               84

=Chung-ming=, China. 32N. 121E.                               85

=Chung-pa=, China. 32N. 105E.                                 84

=Chung-wei=, China. 37N. 105E.                                82

=Chu-san=, China. 30N. 122E.                                  85

=Chu-shan=, China. 32N. 110E.                                 82

=Chu-tze-chieh=, Manchuria. 43N. 129E.                        90

=Cilicia=, Asia Minor. 36N. 34E.                              46

=Clara Island=, Burma. 11N. 98E.                              71

=Cleopatra's Needle=, Philippine Is. 10N. 119E.               77

=Clifford Island=, Korea. 37N. 126E.                          90

=Cocanada=, Madras. 17N. 82E.                                 62

[*]=Cochin=, Madras. 10N. 76E.                                63

=Cochin China=, Indo-China. 11N. 106E.                        71

=Codoor=, Madras. 14N. 79E.                                   63

=Coguiga=, Madras. 17N. 82E.                                  62

[*]=Coimbatore=, Madras, 11N. 77E.                            63

=Colleroon River=, Madras, 11N. 80E.                          63

=Colnett Strait=, Japan. 30N. 130E.                           89

[*]=Colombo=, Ceylon. 7N. 80E.                                63

=Combermere Bay=, Burma. 20N. 94E.                            67

=Comillah=, Bengal. 23N. 91E.                                 61

=Comorin, Cape=, Madras. 8N. 77E.                             63

=Concepcion=, Philippine Is. 11N. 123E.                       77

=Congun=, Persia. 29N. 52E.                                   45

[*]=Conjeveram=, Madras. 13N. 80E.                            63

=Constantinovsk=, Siberia. 49N. 140E.                         95

=Cook Channel=, Philippine Is. 10N. 120E.                     77

=Coonoor=, Madras, 11N. 77E.                                  63

=Cord del Norte=, Philippine Is. 18N. 122E.                   77

=Coromandel Coast=, Madras. 13N. 80E.                         63

=Coronado Pt.=, Philippine Is. 8N. 122E.                      77

=Coronge Island=, Burma. 17N. 94E.                            67

=Cotabato=, East Indies. 7N. 124E.                            75

=Cotta Bato=, Philippine Is. 7N. 124E.                        77

=Craig Island=, China. 25N. 122E.                             89

=Cuddalore=, Madras. 12N. 80E.                                63

=Cumbum=, Madras. 16N. 79E.                                   62

=Cundapur=, Madras. 14N. 75E.                                 63

=Cuntuda=, Arabia. 19N. 41E.                                  44

=Current Island=, East Indies. 5N. 132E.                      75

=Cutch=, Bombay. 23N. 70E.                                    56

=Cutch, Runn of=, Bombay. 24N. 71E.                           56

=Cuttack=, Bengal. 21N. 86E.                                  60

=Cuttack Mehal=, Bengal. 21N. 85E.                            60

=Cuttani River=, Mysore. 12N. 77E.                            63

=Cuyos Is.=, Philippine Is. 11N. 121E.                        77

=Cyclops Mts.=, East Indies. 3S. 140E.                        75


=Dabbasheth=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                            12

=Daberath=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                              12

=Dabhai=, Bombay. 22N. 73E.                                   56

=Dabla=, Rajputana. 26N. 75E.                                 59

=Dabsatu=, Mongolia. 44N. 120E.                               83

=Dacca=, Bengal. 24N. 90E.                                    61

=Dahan=, Siam. 16N. 105E.                                     70

=Dahira=, Arabia. 24N. 56E.                                   45

=Dahna=, Arabia. 25N. 48E.                                    44

=Dahna=, Arabia. 21N. 50E. 44,                                45

=Dairen=, China. 39N. 122E.                                   83

=Dairen=, Manchuria. 39N. 122E.                               90

=Daishoji=, Japan. 36N. 136E.                                 91

=Daiwurconda=, Haidarabad. 17N. 79E.                          62

=Dakar=, Bombay. 23N. 73E.                                    56

=Dakka=, Afghanistan. 34N. 71E.                               58

=Daksam=, Bengal. 23N. 91E.                                   61

=Dalai Nor=, Mongolia. 43N. 117E.                             83

=Dalhousie=, Burma. 16N. 94E.                                 67

=Dalhousie=, Punjab. 32N. 76E.                                58

=Daltonganj=, Bengal. 24N. 84E.                               60

=Dalupiri=, Philippine Is. 19N. 121E.                         77

[*]=Daman=, Bombay. 20N. 73E.                                 56

=Daman-i-Kuh=, Turkestan. 38N. 57E.                           45

=Damar=, Arabia. 15N.                                         44

[*]=Damascus=, Palestine. 34N. 36E.                           12

=Dambulla=, Ceylon. 8N. 81E.                                  63

=Dammer=, East Indies. 6S. 128E.                              75

=Damoh=, Central Provs. 24N. 80E.                             60

=Dampier Island=, East Indies. 5S. 146E.                      75

=Dampier Strait=, East Indies. 1S. 130E.                      75

=Dan=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                   12

=Danu=, Bombay. 20N. 73E.                                     57

=D'Anville Gulf=, Siberia. 43N. 131E.                         95

=Dapean=, Indo-China. 21N. 106E.                              70

=Dapitan=, Philippine Is. 8N. 123E.                           77

=Dapsang Mount=, Kashmir. 35N. 77E.                           58

=Dapuli=, Bombay. 18N. 73E.                                   57

=Darak=, Persia. 32N. 58E.                                    45

=Darbah=, Punjab. 29N. 75E.                                   59

=Darbhangah=, Bengal. 26N. 86E.                               61

=Dardanelles=, Asia Minor. 40N. 26E.                          46

=Dare-bhyn River=, Burma. 16N. 95E.                           67

=Dargai=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 34N. 72E.                      58

=Dargai Peak=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 33N. 71E.                 58

=Darjiling=, Bengal. 27N. 89E.                                61

=Darrang=, Assam. 86N. 92E.                                   61

=Darvel Bay=, East Indies. 5N. 118E.                          74

=Dasa=, Turkey in Asia. 34N. 42E.                             47

=Dasuruan=, Java. 8S. 113E.                                   76

=Data=, Burma. 16N. 95E.                                      67

=Data Mt.=, Philippine Is. 17N. 122E.                         77

=Datrapur=, Bengal. 26N. 90E.                                 61

=Dattiah=, Central India. 26N. 78E.                           60

=Daude=, East Indies. 9S. 142E.                               75

[*]=Daulatabad=, Haidarabad. 20N. 75E.                        62

=Daulatpur=, Sind. 26S. 68E.                                  59

=Davao=, Philippine Island. 7N. 126E.                         77

=Davao Bay=, Philippine Is. 6N. 126E.                         77

=Davilacan=, East Indies. 17N. 122E.                          74

=Davis Island=, Burma. 10N. 98E.                              71

=Dawunakonda=, Madras. 16N. 78E.                              62

=Dayang Bunting=, Malacca Str. 6N. 100E.                      68

=Dazan Bandida=, Mongolia. 44N. 116E.                         83

=Dazol Bay=, Philippine Is. 16N. 120E.                        77

[*]=Dead Sea=, Palestine. 31N. 35E.                           13

=Debar Lake=, Rajputana. 24N. 74E.                            59

=Debari=, Rajputana. 25N. 74E.                                59

=Debir=, Palestine. 31N. 35E.                                 12

=Dedicas Vol.=, Philippine Is. 19N. 122E.                     77

=Deeg=, Rajputana. 27N. 77E.                                  59

=Degode=, Rajputana. 25N. 75E.                                59

=Dehra=, United Provs. 30N. 78E.                              58

=Deir=, Turkey in Asia. 35N. 40E.                             47

=Delhi=, East Indies. 8S. 126E.                               75

[*]=Delhi=, Punjab. 29N. 77E.                                 59

=Deli=, East Indies. 4N. 99E.                                 74

=Delidge Irmak R.=, Asia Minor. 39N. 35E.                     46

=Demavend=, Persia. 35N. 52E.                                 45

=Demavend Mount=, Persia. 36N. 52E.                           45

=Dengiz, Lake=, As. Russia. 53N. 73E.                         94

=Denisli=, Asia Minor. 38N. 29E.                              46

=D'Entrecasteaux Is.=, East Indies. 10S. 150E.                75

[*]=Deogarh=, Central Provs. 22N. 79E.                        60

=Deogurh=, Bengal. 25N. 87E.                                  61

=Deogurh=, Bombay. 16N. 73E.                                  57

=Deoniagarh=, Nepal. 28N. 84E.                                60

=Dera Bugti=, Baluchistan. 29N. 69E.                          59

=Dera Futti Khan=, Punjab. 31N. 71E.                          58

=Dera Ghazi Khan=, Punjab. 30N. 71E.                          58

=Dera Ishmail Khan=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 32N. 71E.           58

=Derajat=, Punjab. 31N. 71E.                                  58

=Desht River=, Persia. 25N. 62E.                              45

=Dhalkot=, Kashmir. 34N. 74E.                                 58

=Dhamtari=, Central Provs. 21N. 81E.                          60

[*]=Dhar=, Central India. 23N. 75E.                           56

=Dharampur=, Bombay. 20N. 73E.                                56

[*]=Dharmapuri=, Madras. 12N. 78E.                            63

=Dharmawaram=, Madras. 15N. 78E.                              62

=Dharumsala=, Punjab. 32N. 76E.                               58

=Dharur=, Haidarabad. 19N. 76E.                               62

[*]=Dharwar=, Bombay. 16N. 75E.                               57

=Dhat-Irk=, Arabia. 22N. 41E.                                 44

=Dhaulagiri Mt.=, Nepal. 29N. 84E.                            60

=Dheiell=, Bombay. 21N. 74E.                                  56

=Dhola=, Bombay. 22N. 72E.                                    56

=Dholarra=, Bombay. 22N. 72E.                                 56

[*]=Dholka=, Bombay. 23N. 72E.                                56

[*]=Dholpur=, Rajputana. 27N. 78E.                            59

=Dhond=, Bombay. 18N. 75E.                                    57

=Dhoraji=, Bombay. 22N. 70E.                                  56

=Dhrangadra=, Bombay. 23N. 71E.                               56

[*]=Dhulia=, Bombay. 21N. 75E.                                56

=Dhuri River=, Punjab. 30N. 76E.                              58

=Diamond Harbour=, Bengal. 22N. 88E.                          61

[*]=Diarbekr=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 39E.                      47

=Diarmer Mount=, Kashmir. 35N. 74E.                           58

=Dibon=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                                 12

=Dibrugarh=, Assam. 27N. 95E.                                 67

=Dickson Island=, Siberia. 73N. 81E.                          94

=Dickson, Point=, Malay Pen. 3N. 102E.                        69

=Dien-Bien=, Indo-China. 21N. 103E.                           70

[*]=Diggi=, Rajputana. 27N. 75E.                              59

=Dihang River=, Tibet. 28N. 95E.                              61

=Dihing River=, Assam. 27N. 96E.                              67

=Dilasac Bay=, Philippine Is. 16N. 122E.                      77

=Dilawar=, Punjab. 29N. 71E.                                  59

=Dilman=, Persia. 38N. 45E.                                   47

=Dinagat=, Philippine Islands. 10N. 126E.                     77

=Dinajpur=, Bengal. 24N. 88E.                                 61

=Dinapur=, Bengal. 26N. 85E.                                  60

=Dindi River=, Haidarabad. 17N. 79E.                          62

[*]=Dindigull=, Madras. 10N. 78E.                             63

=Dindings=, Malay Peninsula. 4N. 101E.                        68

=Dineir=, Asia Minor. 38N. 31E.                               46

=Dingarh=, Punjab. 29N. 72E.                                  59

=Diomede Island=, Siberia. 66N. 172W.                         95

=Dion=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                                  13

=Discovery Reef=, E. Indies. 4S. 109E.                        76

=Diu Fort=, Bombay. 21N. 71E.                                 56

=Diu Island=, Bombay. 21N. 71E.                               56

=Divy, Point=, Madras. 16N. 81E.                              62

=Diwanieh=, Turkey in Asia. 32N. 45E.                         47

=Dizful=, Persia. 32N. 49E.                                   47

=Djahampur=, Punjab. 30N. 71E.                                58

=Djambu=, East Indies. 2S. 104E.                              74

=Djanik=, Asia Minor. 41N. 36E.                               46

=Djering, Cape=, Malacca Str. 2N. 102E.                       69

=Dohad=, Bombay. 23N. 74E.                                    56

=Doktawadi River=, Burma. 23N. 97E.                           67

=Dolar=, Central India. 24N. 82E.                             60

[*]=Dolon-nor=, China. 42N. 116E.                             83

=Dolon-shirke=, Inner Mongolia. 40N. 107E.                    82

=Dolphin, Cape=, Malay Pen. 9N. 98E.                          71

=Dome Island=, Burma. 12N. 98E.                               71

=Donahyu=, Burma. 17N. 96E.                                   67

[*]=Dondra Head=, Ceylon. 6N. 81E.                            63

=Dong-hoi=, Indo-China. 18N. 107E.                            70

=Dong Rek=, Siam. 14N. 102E.                                  71

=Don-nai River=, Indo-China. 11N. 107E.                       71

=Dor=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                                   12

=Dorak=, Persia. 31N. 49E.                                    47

=Dornakal=, Haidarabad. 17N. 80E.                             62

=Dothan=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                12

=Douglas=, East Indies. 20N. 136E.                            75

=Dourga Strait=, East Indies. 7S. 139E.                       75

=Dowhali=, Central Provs. 21N. 80E.                           60

=Dowlaishwardin=, Madras. 17N. 82E.                           62

=Dounggyi=, Burma. 17N. 96E.                                  67

=Dras=, Kashmir. 34N. 76E.                                    58

=Drug=, Central Provs. 21N. 82E.                              60

=Dsergile=, Mongolia. 44N. 115E.                              83

=Duda=, Haidarabad. 17N. 77E.                                 62

=Dudhna River=, Haidarabad. 19N. 77E.                         62

=Dudinsh=, Siberia. 69N. 87E.                                 94

=Dudwa=, United Provs. 29N. 81E.                              60

=Dulmera=, Rajputana. 28N. 74E.                               59

=Dumaran Is.=, Philippine Is. 11N. 120E.                      77

=Dunbula=, Ceylon. 7N. 81E.                                   63

=Dungarpur=, Rajputana. 24N. 74E.                             59

=Dungun, River=, Malay Pen. 5N. 103E.                         68

=Dupadu=, Madras. 16N. 79E.                                   62

=Durbot=, Inner Mongolia. 42N. 111E.                          82

=Duroch, Cape=, Korea. 39N. 128E.                             90

=D'Urville Island=, E. Indies. 3S. 143E.                      75

=D'Urville Point=, E. Indies. 2S. 138E.                       75

=Dwana Hills=, Burma. 17N. 98E.                               67

[*]=Dwarka=, Bombay. 22N. 69E.                                56


=Eap=, East Indies. 10N. 136E.                                75

=East Cape=, Siberia. 66N. 170W.                              95

=Ebal, Mount=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                           12

=Echigo=, Japan. 37N. 139E.                                   91

=Echisen=, Japan. 36N. 136E.                                  91

=Edrei=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                                 12

=Edremid=, Asia Minor. 40N. 27E.                              46

=Edwardesabad=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 33N. 70E.                58

=Egerdir=, Asia Minor. 38N. 31E.                              46

=Egin=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 39E.                             47

=Eglon=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                 12

[*]=Ekron=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                              12

=El Batna=, Arabia. 25N. 57E.                                 45

=El Bedda=, Arabia. 25N. 52E.                                 45

[*]=Elburz Mountains=, Persia. 36N. 51E.                      45

=Elealeh=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                               12

[*]=Elephanta=, Bombay. 19N. 73E.                             57

=El Hadhr=, Turkey in Asia. 36N. 43E.                         47

=El Hasa=, Arabia. 28N. 48E.                                  44

=El Hejaz=, Arabia. 25N. 38E.                                 44

=El Hofuf=, Arabia. 25N. 50E.                                 44

=El Jezireh= or =Mesopotamia=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 40E.      47

=El Katif=, Arabia. 27N. 50E.                                 45

[*]=Ellichpur=, Berar. 21N. 78E.                              60

=Elliot Island=, Manchuria. 39N. 122E.                        90

=Ellore=, Madras. 17N. 81E.                                   62

=Elmaly=, Asia Minor. 36N. 30E.                               46

=Elphinstone=, Burma. 12N. 98E.                               71

=El Wedj=, Arabia. 26N. 36E.                                  44

=Elwend Mountain=, Persia. 35N. 49E.                          47

=El Yemen=, Arabia. 16N. 43E.                                 44

=Emamgarh=, Sind. 27N. 69E.                                   59

=Emmaus=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                13

=Enciam Island=, Madras. 8N. 77E.                             63

=Endau River=, Malay Pen. 3N. 104E.                           69

=Enderes=, Turkey in Asia. 40N. 38E.                          47

[*]=Endor=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                              12

=Engannim=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                              12

=Engano Cape=, East Indies. 19N. 122E.                        74

=Engano Island=, East Indies. 5S. 103E.                       74

=Engedi=, Palestine. 31N. 35E.                                12

=English Bazar=, Bengal. 25N. 88E.                            61

=Ennore=, Madras. 13N. 80E.                                   63

=En-Rimmon=, Palestine. 31N. 35E.                             12

=Enzeli=, Persia. 38N. 49E.                                   47

=Ephraim=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                               13

=Ephraim, Mount=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                        12

[*]=Erbil=, Turkey in Asia. 36N. 44E.                         47

=Eregli=, Asia Minor. 37N. 34E.                               46

=Eregli=, Asia Minor. 41N. 32E.                               46

=Erinpura=, Rajputana. 25N. 73E.                              59

=Ernakolam=, Madras. 10N. 76E.                                63

[*]=Erode=, Madras. 11N. 78E.                                 63

[*]=Erzerum=, Turkey in Asia. 40N. 41E.                       47

[*]=Erzingan=, Turkey in Asia. 40N. 40E.                      47

=Esanzaki=, Japan. 41N. 141E.                                 88

=Esashi=, Japan. 41N. 140E.                                   88

=Esasta=, Japan. 44N. 143E.                                   88

[*]=Esdraelon, Plain of=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                13

=Eshtemod=, Palestine. 31N. 35E.                              12

=Eskihissar=, Asia Minor. 37N. 28E.                           46

[*]=Eskishehr=, Asia Minor. 40N. 30E.                         46

=Etah=, United Provinces. 28N. 79E.                           60

=Etna, Mount=, China. 19N. 109E.                              84

=Etwali=, United Provs. 27N. 79E.                             60

[*]=Euphrates R.=, Turkey in Asia. 30N. 48E.                  47

=Euripik=, East Indies. 6N. 142E.                             75

[*]=Everest, Mount=, Nepal. 28N. 87E.                         61


=Fais=, East Indies, 10N. 141E.                               75

=Faizabad=, United Provs. 27N. 82E.                           60

=Fak-chan=, Burma. 11N. 99E.                                  71

=Fakumen=, Manchuria. 42N. 123E.                              90

=Fakuoka=, Japan. 34N. 130E.                                  89

=Falam=, Burma. 23N. 94E.                                     67

=Falan=, Indo-China. 17N. 106E.                               70

=False Cape=, East Indies. 8S. 137E.                          75

=Fan=, China. 36N. 116E.                                      83

=Fan-cheng=, China. 32N. 112E.                                82

=Fao=, Turkey in Asia. 30N. 48E.                              47

=Farallon de Pajaros=, E. Indies. 20N. 145E.                  75

=Faraulep=, East Indies. 9N. 145E.                            75

=Faridkot=, Punjab. 31N. 75E.                                 58

=Farrah=, Afghanistan. 32N. 62E.                              45

=Farridabad=, Punjab. 28N. 77E.                               59

=Fars=, Persia. 28N. 53E.                                     45

=Farsan Kebeer=, Red Sea. 17N. 42E.                           44

=Farukhabad=, United Provs. 27N. 79E.                         60

=Farukhnagar=, Punjab. 28N. 77E.                              59

=Fasa=, Persia. 29N. 54E.                                     45

=Fatehabad=, Punjab. 30N. 75E.                                58

=Fatehpur=, United Provs. 26N. 81E.                           60

=Fat-shan=, China. 23N. 113E.                                 85

=Fattehpur=, Punjab. 29N. 70E.                                59

=Fazilka=, Punjab. 30N. 74E.                                  58

=Fei=, China. 35N. 118E.                                      83

=Fen-chau=, China. 37N. 112E.                                 82

=Feng=, China. 35N. 117E.                                     83

=Feng-chan=, China. 29N. 112E.                                84

=Feng-cheng=, China. 28N. 116E.                               85

=Feng-hsiang=, China. 34N. 108E.                              82

=Feng-hwa=, China. 30N. 121E.                                 85

=Feng-hwa=, Manchuria. 43N. 124E.                             90

=Feng-kwang-chen=, Manchuria. 40N. 124E.                      90

=Feng-ning=, China. 41N. 117E.                                83

=Feng-shan-shan=, China. 26N. 117E.                           85

=Feng-tu=, China. 30N. 107E.                                  84

=Feng-yang=, China. 33N. 117E.                                83

=Fen-ho=, China. 37N. 112E.                                   82

=Ferahan=, Persia. 34N. 50E.                                  47

=Filias River=, Asia Minor. 42N. 32E.                         46

=Filipovskoi Korennoi=, Siberia. 71N. 97E.                    94

=Firospur=, Punjab. 28N. 77E.                                 59

=Firozpur=, Punjab. 31N. 75E.                                 58

=Fitze-long Bay=, Indo-China. 21N. 307E.                      70

=Flores=, East Indies. 9S. 121E.                              74

=Fly River=, East Indies. 8S. 142E.                           75

=Fo-ki=, Formosa. 25N. 121E.                                  89

=Fo-kien=, China. 26N. 118E.                                  85

[*]=Formosa=, China. 24N. 121E.                               74

=Formosa Strait=, Formosa. 25N. 120E.                         89

=Fou=, China. 30N. 107E.                                      84

=Foul Island=, Burma. 18N. 94E.                               67

=Frederick Henry Is.=, E. Indies. 8S. 137E.                   75

=Frederick Wilhelm Harbour=, E. Indies. 5S. 145E.             75

=Freewill=, East Indies. 1N. 135E.                            75

=Fu=, China. 36N. 109E.                                       82

[*]=Fu-chau=, China. 26N. 119E.                               85

=Fu-chau=, China. 28N. 116E.                                  85

=Fu-chou=, Manchuria. 40N. 122E.                              90

=Fuga=, Philippine Islands. 18N. 121E.                        77

[*]=Fuji Yama=, Japan. 35N. 139E.                             91

=Fu-kang=, China. 24N. 114E.                                  85

=Fukaye Island=, Japan. 33N. 129E.                            89

=Fu-kiang River=, China. 31N. 106E.                           84

=Fu-ku=, China. 39N. 111E.                                    82

=Fukui=, Japan. 36N. 136E.                                    91

=Fukushima=, Japan. 36N. 138E.                                91

=Fukushima=, Japan. 38N. 140E.                                91

=Fukuyama=, Japan. 35N. 133E.                                 91

=Fukuyama=, Japan. 41N. 140E.                                 88

=Funatsiu=, Japan. 36N. 137E.                                 91

=Fu-ngan=, China. 27N. 120E.                                  85

=Fu-ning=, China. 27N. 120E.                                  85

=Fu-niu-shan=, China. 34N. 112E.                              82

=Fu-ping=, China. 34N. 108E.                                  82

=Furidpur=, Bengal. 24N. 90E.                                 61

=Fusan=, Korea. 35N. 129E.                                    90

=Fu-shan=, China. 38N. 121E.                                  83

=Fushiki=, Japan. 37N. 137E.                                  91

=Fushimi=, Japan. 35N. 136E.                                  91

=Fu-tsing=, China. 26N. 120E.                                 85

=Futtehpur=, Punjab. 30N. 72E.                                58

=Fyzabad=, Afghanistan. 37N. 70E.                             45


=Gad=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                                   12

=Gadak=, Bombay. 16N. 76E.                                    57

=Gadara=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                                13

=Gaddari=, Haidarabad. 18N. 78E.                              62

=Galas River=, Malay Pen. 5N. 102E.                           68

=Galbyn-Gobi=, In. Mongolia. 42N. 106E.                       82

=Gali=, Malay Peninsula. 4N. 102E.                            69

=Galilee=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                               13

=Galilee, Sea of=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                       13

[*]=Galle=, Ceylon. 6N. 80E.                                  63

[*]=Gamala=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                             13

=Gandava=, Baluchistan. 28N. 67E.                             59

=Ganges=, Bengal. 22N. 89E.                                   61

=Gangpur=, Bengal. 22N. 84E.                                  60

=Ganh-rai Bay=, Indo-China. 10N. 107E.                        71

=Ganjam=, Madras. 19N. 85E.                                   62

=Ganju-san=, Japan. 40N. 141E.                                88

=Gao-tin=, Manchuria. 45N. 129E.                              90

=Garampi=, Formosa. 21N. 121E.                                89

=Gares=, Kashmir. 35N. 75E.                                   58

=Garhwal=, United Provs. 31N. 79E.                            60

=Garo Hills=, Assam. 26N. 91E.                                61

=Garut=, Java. 7S. 108E.                                      76

=Gath=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                  12

=Gatkau=, Bombay. 22N. 69E.                                   56

=Gaurisankar Mt.=, Nepal. 28N. 87E.                           61

=Gautier Mts.=, East Indies. 3S. 137E.                        75

=Gawalgarh=, Berar. 21N. 77E.                                 60

[*]=Gaya=, Bengal. 25N. 85E.                                  60

[*]=Gaza=, Palestine. 32N. 34E.                               12

=Geba=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                  12

=Gede, Mount=, Java. 7S. 107E.                                76

=Gedis Chai R.=, Asia Minor. 38N. 28E.                        46

=Gedor=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                 12

=Geelvink Bay=, East Indies. 3S. 135E.                        75

=Geelvink Strait=, East Indies. 1S. 135E.                     75

=Geik Dagh=, Asia Minor. 36N. 33E.                            46

=Gelam Island=, Borneo. 3S. 110E.                             76

=Genkai=, Japan. 34N. 131E.                                   89

=Gensan=, Korea. 39N. 127E.                                   90

=Genteng, Cape=, Java. 8S. 106E.                              76

=Geok Tepe=, Turkestan. 38N. 58E.                             45

=Georgetown=, Penang. 5N. 100E.                               68

=Gerar=, Palestine. 31N. 34E.                                 12

[*]=Gerasa=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                             13

=Gergesenes=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                            13

=Gerizim, Mount=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                        12

=Geuk Su=, Asia Minor. 36N. 34E.                              46

=Ghaggan River=, Punjab. 30N. 76E.                            58

=Ghagra R.=, United Provs. 26N. 84E.                          60

=Gharrah=, Sind. 25N. 68E.                                    59

[*]=Ghaziabad=, United Provs. 29N. 77E.                       59

[*]=Ghazipur=, United Provs. 26N. 84E.                        60

[*]=Ghazni=, Afghanistan. 34N. 68E.                           58

=Ghijinsk=, Siberia. 62N. 162E.                               95

=Ghijinsk=, Gulf of, Siberia. 61N. 160E.                      95

=Ghilan=, Persia. 38N. 49E.                                   47

=Ghubbet el Kamar=, Arabia. 16N. 53E.                         45

=Ghunnapura=, Haidarabad. 17N. 78E.                           62

=Giamda=, Tibet. 30N. 93E.                                    61

=Giaur Dagh=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 37E.                       46

[*]=Gibeon=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                             12

=Gifu=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                     91

=Gigasar=, Rajputana. 28N. 73E.                               59

[*]=Gilboa, Mount=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                      12

=Gilead, Mount=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                         12

=Gilgal=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                12

=Gilolo=, East Indies. 1N. 127E.                              75

=Gilolo Island=, East Indies. 1N. 128E.                       75

=Gilolo Pass=, East Indies. 0. 129E.                          75

=Gimzo=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                 12

=Gioda=, Japan. 36N. 139E.                                    91

=Giran=, Formosa. 25N. 122E.                                  89

=Girap=, Rajputana. 26N. 70E.                                 59

=Girari=, Central Provs. 23N. 82E.                            60

[*]=Giridhi=, Bengal. 24N. 86E.                               61

=Girishk=, Afghanistan. 32N. 65E.                             45

=Girna=, Bombay. 21N. 75E.                                    56

=Girri River=, Punjab. 31N. 78E.                              58

=Girwari=, Central India. 26N. 77E.                           60

[*]=Goa=, Bombay. 15N. 74E.                                   57

=Goa Goa Is.=, East Indies. 7S. 115E.                         76

=Goalpara=, Assam. 26N. 91E.                                  61

=Goalundo=, Bengal. 24N. 90E.                                 61

=Gobi=, Inner Mongolia. 42N. 105E.                            82

=Godavari River=, Madras. 17N. 82E.                           62

=Goderi=, Madras. 19N. 84E.                                   62

=God-i-Sirreh=, Baluchistan. 30N. 62E.                        45

=Godra=, Bombay. 23N. 74E.                                    56

=Godwar=, Rajputana. 25N. 73E.                                59

=Goghe=, Bombay. 22N. 72E.                                    56

=Gokak=, Bombay. 16N. 75E.                                    57

=Golan=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                                 12

[*]=Golconda=, Haidarabad. 18N. 78E.                          62

=Golden Throne Mt.=, Kashmir. 35N. 77E.                       58

=Golok River=, Malay Pen. 6N. 102E.                           68

=Golra=, Punjab. 34N. 73E.                                    58

=Golugonda=, Madras. 18N. 82E.                                62

=Gonda=, United Provs. 27N. 82E.                              60

=Gonokawa=, Japan. 35N. 133E.                                 91

=Good Hope, Cape of=, China. 23N. 117E.                       85

=Goona=, Central India. 24N. 77E.                             60

[*]=Gooruncondah=, Madras. 14N. 79E.                          63

=Gopalpur=, Madras. 19N. 85E.                                 62

=Gopanur=, Madras. 16N. 79E.                                  62

=Gorakhpur=, United Provs. 27N. 83E.                          60

=Gorkha=, Nepal. 28N. 84E.                                    60

=Gorontalo=, East Indies. 0. 124E.                            75

=Gosaigaon=, Assam. 27N. 94E.                                 67

=Gosgarh=, Punjab. 28N. 72E.                                  59

=Gotoshima=, Japan. 33N. 129E.                                89

=Gowada=, Madras. 16N. 81E.                                   62

=Gowhatty=, Assam. 26N. 92E.                                  61

=Grajagan Bay=, Java. 9S. 114E.                               76

=Granville=, East Indies. 10S. 147E.                          75

=Great Gatwick Is.=, Indo-China. 10N. 109E.                   71

=Great Gorge=, China. 31N. 110E.                              84

=Great Karimon=, Malacca Str. 1N. 103E.                       69

=Great Lake=, Indo-China. 14N. 109E.                          71

=Great Zab=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 44E.                        47

=Grik=, Malay Peninsula. 5N. 101E.                            68

=Guam=, East Indies. 13N. 145E.                               75

=Gudam=, Madras. 18N. 82E.                                    62

=Gudur=, Madras. 14N. 80E.                                    63

=Gugara=, Punjab. 31N. 73E.                                   58

=Guguan=, East Indies. 18N. 145E.                             75

=Guie-chau Island=, China. 21N. 109E.                         84

=Guimaras Is.=, Philippine Is. 11N. 123E.                     77

[*]=Gujranwala=, Punjab. 32N. 74E.                            58

[*]=Gujrat=, Punjab. 33N. 74E.                                58

[*]=Gulbarga=, Haidarabad. 17N. 77E.                          62

=Guma=, Bombay. 22N. 72E.                                     56

=Gumal Pass=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 32N. 70E.                  58

=Gumal River=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 32N. 70E.                 58

=Gumri=, Bombay. 19N. 75E.                                    57

=Gumsur=, Madras. 20N. 85E.                                   62

=Gumti River=, Bengal. 23N. 91E.                              61

=Gunaidio=, Sind. 26N. 70E.                                   59

=Gundakamma River=, Madras. 16N. 80E.                         62

=Gunong Hantu=, Malay Pen. 3N. 102E.                          69

=Gunong Tahan=, Malay Pen. 5N. 102E.                          68

=Guntakal=, Madras. 15N. 77E.                                 62

=Guntur=, Madras. 16N. 81E.                                   62

=Gunung Api=, East Indies. 6S. 126E.                          75

=Gunungtua=, Sumatra. 1N. 100E.                               69

=Gurdaspur=, Punjab. 32N. 75E.                                58

=Gurgaon=, Punjab. 28N. 77E.                                  59

=Gurla Mountain=, Tibet. 30N. 82E.                            60

=Gurrah=, Rajputana. 25N. 72E.                                59

=Gurun=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 37E.                            46

=Gutah=, Punjab. 30N. 75E.                                    58

[*]=Gutti=, Madras. 15N. 78E.                                 62

=Gwa=, Burma. 18N. 94E.                                       67

=Gwadur=, Baluchistan. 25N. 62E.                              45

=Gwaja-shima=, Lu-Chu Is. 30N. 129E.                          89

=Gwal=, Punjab. 31N. 69E.                                     58

[*]=Gwalior=, Central India. 26N. 78E.                        60

=Gwas-san=, Japan. 39N. 140E.                                 88

=Gwettur=, Persia. 25N. 61E.                                  45

=Gya=, Kashmir. 34N. 78E.                                     58

=Gya Peak=, Kashmir. 32N. 78E.                                58

=Gyaing=, Burma. 17N. 98E.                                    67


=Habban=, Arabia. 15N. 47E.                                   44

=Hachinohe=, Japan. 40N. 142E.                                88

=Hachirogata=, Japan. 40N. 141E.                              88

=Hachoji=, Japan. 36N. 139E.                                  91

=Hadad Rimmon=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                          12

=Ha-dong=, Indo-China. 16N. 109E.                             70

=Hadramaut=, Arabia. 17N. 50E. 44,                            45

=Hadramaut Mahrah=, Arabia. 17N. 50E. 44,                     45

=Hagi=, Japan. 34N. 131E.                                     89

=Hagiang=, Indo-China. 23N. 105E.                             70

=Hagui=, Japan. 37N. 137E.                                    91

=Hai=, China. 35N. 119E.                                      83

=Hai-an=, China. 20N. 110E.                                   84

=Hai-cheng=, China. 36N. 106E.                                82

=Hai-cheng=, Manchuria. 41N. 123E.                            90

=Hai-chwen Island=, China. 21N. 113E.                         85

[*]=Haidarabad=, Haidarabad. 17N. 79E.                        62

=Haidarabad=, Sind. 25N. 68E.                                 59

=Hai-duong=, Indo-China. 21N. 106E.                           70

=Hai-ju=, Korea. 38N. 126E.                                   90

=Hai-ling Island=, China. 21N. 112E.                          84

=Hai-nan Island=, China. 19N. 110E.                           84

=Hai-nan Strait=, China. 20N. 110E.                           84

=Hai-ning=, China. 31N. 121E.                                 85

=Hai-pang=, Korea. 33N. 126E.                                 90

=Hai-phong=, Indo-China. 21N. 107E.                           70

=Hai-tau Bay=, China. 24N. 118E.                              85

=Hai-yang=, China. 37N. 122E.                                 83

=Hai-yong=, Korea. 43N. 130E.                                 90

=Hajin=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 36E.                            46

[*]=Hakata=, Japan. 34N. 130E.                                89

=Hakodate=, Japan. 41N. 141E.                                 88

=Haku San=, Japan. 36N. 137E.                                 91

=Halcon Mt.=, Mindoro, Philippine Is. 16N. 118E.              77

=Haleb=, Turkey in Asia. 36N. 37E.                            46

=Haleb=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 38E.                            46

=Halhul=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                12

=Halla=, Sind. 26N. 68E.                                      59

=Hal-la-san=, Korea. 3N. 127E.                                90

=Halli=, Arabia. 19N. 41E.                                    44

=Halmaheira=, East Indies. 2N. 129E.                          75

=Halys Cape=, Asia Minor. 42N. 36E.                           46

=Hamad=, Arabia. 31N. 40E.                                    44

=Hamada=, Japan. 35N. 132E.                                   91

[*]=Hamadan=, Persia. 35N. 48E.                               47

=Hamamatsu=, Japan. 35N. 138E.                                91

=Hambantotta=, Ceylon. 6N. 81E.                               63

=Ham-Gyeng, North=, Korea. 41N. 129E.                         90

=Ham-Gyeng, South=, Korea. 40N. 128E.                         90

=Ham-leung=, Korea. 40N. 127E.                                90

=Hamirpur=, United Provs. 26N. 80E.                           60

=Hammam Ali=, Turkey in Asia. 36N. 43E.                       47

=Hammath=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                               12

=Hamun=, Persia. 31N. 60E.                                    45

=Hamun Marsh=, Persia. 28N. 62E.                              45

=Han=, China. 31N. 104E.                                      84

=Han River=, Korea. 37N. 127E.                                90

=Ha-nam=, Indo-China. 21N. 106E.                              70

=Hanarikonda=, Haidarabad. 18N. 80E.                          62

=Han-cheng=, China. 36N. 110E.                                82

=Han-chung=, China. 33N. 107E.                                82

=Handa=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                    91

=Hangal=, Bombay. 15N. 75E.                                   57

=Hang-chau=, China. 30N. 120E.                                85

=Hang-chau Bay=, China. 30N. 121E.                            85

[*]=Han-kau=, China. 31N. 114E.                               85

=Han-kiang=, China. 32N. 110E.                                82

=Han-kiang River=, China. 32N. 112E.                          84

=Hannathon=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                             12

[*]=Hanoi=, Indo-China. 21N. 106E.                            70

[*]=Hansi=, Punjab. 29N. 76E.                                 59

=Han-yang=, China. 31N. 114E.                                 85

=Han-yin=, China. 33N. 109E.                                  82

=Haranhalli=, Mysore. 13N. 76E.                               63

[*]=Harbin=, Manchuria. 46N. 127E.                            90

=Hardanhulli=, Mysore. 12N. 77E.                              63

=Hardoi=, United Provinces. 27N. 80E.                         60

[*]=Hardwar=, United Provinces. 30N. 78E.                     60

=Harihar=, Mysore. 14N. 76E.                                  62

=Harima=, Japan. 35N. 135E.                                   91

=Hari Rud River=, Persia. 35N. 61E.                           45

=Harnai=, Punjab. 30N. 68E.                                   58

=Harran=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 39E.                           47

=Hasah=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 42E.                            47

=Hasdu River=, Central Provs. 22N. 83E.                       60

=Hasora=, Kashmir. 35N. 75E.                                  58

=Hassan=, Mysore. 13N. 76E.                                   63

=Hassan Dagh=, Asia Minor. 38N. 34E.                          46

=Hathnur=, Haidarabad. 20N. 79E.                              62

=Hathras=, United Provs. 28N. 78E.                            60

=Ha-tien=, Indo-China. 10N. 104E.                             71

=Ha-tinh=, Indo-China. 18N. 106E.                             70

=Haut=, Siam. 18N. 99E.                                       70

=Hawaii, Cape=, Siberia. 71N. 178W.                           95

[*]=Hayil=, Arabia. 28N. 42E.                                 44

=Hazaribagh=, Bengal. 24N. 85E.                               60

=Hazor=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                                 12

=Hazro=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 40E.                            47

[*]=Hebron=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                             12

=Hedie=, Arabia. 26N. 39E.                                    44

=Hei-shui=, China. 43N. 118E.                                 83

=Helmand River=, Afghanistan. 34N. 67E.                       58

=Heng-chau=, China. 27N. 112E.                                84

=Heng-shan=, China. 27N. 112E.                                84

=Heng-shan Mt.=, China. 27N. 112E.                            84

=Heng-shi=, China. 24N. 112E.                                 85

=Heng-yang Pen.=, Korea. 34N. 127E.                           90

=Henzada=, Burma. 17N. 95E.                                   67

=Herald Island=, Siberia. 72N. 175W.                          95

[*]=Herat=, Afghanistan. 34N. 62E.                            45

=Hermon, Mount=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                         12

[*]=Heshbon=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                            12

=He-tan Island=, China. 26N. 120E.                            85

=Hetozaki=, Lu-Chu Island. 27N. 128E.                         89

=Hida=, Japan. 36N. 137E.                                     91

=Hidaka Mountains=, Japan. 42N. 143E.                         88

[*]=Hikone=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                91

=Hilleh=, Turkey in Asia. 33N. 45E.                           47

=Himalaya Mts.=, Kashmir. 33N. 77E.                           58

=Himeji=, Japan. 35N. 135E.                                   91

=Hime Thuan=, Indo-China. 11N. 108E.                          71

=Hin=, Siam. 18N. 101E.                                       70

=Hindiah=, Turkey in Asia. 32N. 45E.                          47

=Hindon=, Rajputana. 27N. 77E.                                59

=Hindu Kush Mts.=, Afghanistan. 36N. 70E.                     45

=Hindupur=, Madras. 14N. 77E.                                 63

=Hinganghat=, Central Provs. 20N. 79E.                        60

=Hingoli=, Haidarabad. 20N. 77E.                              62

=Hiogo=, Japan. 35N. 135E.                                    91

=Hippos=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                                13

=Hirado-shima=, Japan. 33N. 130E.                             89

=Hira-shima=, Lu-Chu Island. 30N. 130E.                       89

=Hirijuru=, Mysore. 14N. 77E.                                 63

=Hirosaki=, Japan. 40N. 141E.                                 88

=Hiroshima=, Japan. 34N. 133E.                                91

=Hissar=, Bokhara. 38N. 68E.                                  45

=Hissar=, Punjab. 29N. 76E.                                   59

=Hit=, Turkey in Asia. 34N. 43E.                              47

=Hitachi=, Japan. 36N. 140E.                                  91

=Hitoyoshi=, Japan. 32N. 131E.                                89

=Hiwase=, Japan. 34N. 135E.                                   91

=Ho=, China. 32N. 118E.                                       85

=Ho=, China. 36N. 112E.                                       82

=Hoa-binh=, Indo-China. 21N. 105E.                            70

=Hoa-glu=, Indo-China. 12N. 109E.                             71

=Hoa-pin-su Island=, China. 26N. 134E.                        89

=Ho-chi=, China. 25N. 108E.                                   84

=Hodal=, Punjab. 28N. 77E.                                    59

=Hodeida=, Arabia. 15N. 43E.                                  44

=Ho-feng=, China. 30N. 110E.                                  84

=Hoi-hou=, China. 20N. 110E.                                  84

=Hoi-tung=, China. 19N. 111E.                                 84

=Hoi-yang=, Korea. 39N. 128E.                                 90

=Ho-kau=, China. 40N. 111E.                                   82

=Hoki=, Japan. 35N. 134E.                                     91

=Ho-kiang=, China. 29N. 106E.                                 84

=Ho-kien=, China. 38N. 116E.                                  83

=Hoko-to=, Formosa. 23N. 120E.                                89

=Ho-kow=, Indo-China. 22N. 104E.                              70

=Hokubu-Shoto Is.=, Lu-Chu Is. 28N. 130E.                     89

=Hokurokudo=, Japan. 37N. 138E.                               91

=Homalin=, Burma. 25N. 95E.                                   67

=Honan=, China. 34N. 113E. 82,                                83

=Ho-nan=, China. 35N. 112E.                                   82

[*]=Honawar=, Bombay. 14N. 74E.                               57

=Honda B., Palawan=, Philippine Is. 10N. 118E.                77

=Hong-ju=, Korea. 37N. 127E.                                  90

[*]=Hong-kong=, China. 22N. 114E.                             85

=Hong-yen=, Indo-China. 21N. 106E.                            70

=Honjio=, Japan. 39N. 140E.                                   88

=Hon-koe Bay=, Indo-China. 13N. 109E.                         71

=Hon-Mat Is.=, Indo-China. 19N. 106E.                         70

=Hon Ne Island=, Indo-China. 20N. 106E.                       70

=Hootah=, Arabia. 24N. 48E.                                   44

=Hope Bay=, China. 23N. 117E.                                 85

=Horeimele=, Arabia. 25N. 46E.                                44

=Hosan=, Formosa. 22N. 121E.                                  89

=Hosdarg=, Madras. 12N. 75E.                                  63

=Ho-shan=, China. 22N. 113E.                                  84

=Ho-shan=, China. 37N. 112E.                                  82

=Hoshiarpur=, Punjab. 32N. 76E.                               58

=Ho-shui=, China. 36N. 108E.                                  82

=Hosur=, Madras. 13N. 78E.                                    63

=Ho-tsin=, China. 36N. 111E.                                  82

=Howrah=, Bengal. 23N. 88E.                                   61

=Ho-yuen=, China. 24N. 115E.                                  85

=Hpazaung=, Burma. 19N. 97E.                                  67

=Hsi=, China. 36N. 111E.                                      82

=Hsiang-chau=, China. 24N. 110E.                              84

=Hsiang-cheng=, China. 34N. 114E.                             83

=Hsiang River=, China. 27N. 113E.                             85

=Hsiang-tan=, China. 28N. 113E.                               85

=Hsiang-yang=, China. 32N. 112E.                              84

=Hsiang-yin=, China. 28N. 113E.                               85

=Hsiao-kan=, China. 31N. 114E.                                85

=Hsiau-nor=, Inner Mongolia. 40N. 110E.                       82

=Hsiau-yi=, China. 34N. 109E.                                 82

=Hsiau-wu-tai=, China. 40N. 115E.                             83

=Hsi-chi-chin Bay=, China. 23N. 116E.                         85

=Hsi-chwan=, China. 33N. 112E.                                82

=Hsien-hsia-ling=, China. 28N. 119E.                          85

=Hsi-hsiang=, China. 33N. 108E.                               82

=Hsi-kiang River=, China. 23N. 111E.                          84

=Hsi-lin=, China. 24N. 106E.                                  84

=Hsiling=, China. 39N. 115E.                                  83

=Hsiling Tombs=, China. 39N. 115E.                            83

=Hsi-lung=, China. 25N. 106E.                                 84

=Hsin-chang=, China. 29N. 121E.                               85

=Hsin-chau=, China. 23N. 110E.                                84

=Hsin-feng=, China. 25N. 115E.                                85

=Hsing=, China. 39N. 111E.                                    82

[*]=Hsi-ngan=, China. 34N. 109E.                              82

=Hsing-hwa=, China. 26N. 119E.                                85

=Hsing-hwa Sound=, China. 25N. 119E.                          85

=Hsing-i=, China. 25N. 105E.                                  84

=Hsing-kwo=, China. 30N. 115E.                                85

=Hsing-ngan=, China. 32N. 109E.                               82

=Hsin-hsiang=, China. 35N. 114E.                              83

=Hsin-hsing=, China. 22N. 112E.                               84

=Hsin-hwa=, China. 27N. 111E.                                 84

=Hsin-i=, China. 22N. 111E.                                   84

=Hsin-kan=, China. 27N. 115E.                                 85

=Hsin-king=, Manchuria. 42N. 124E.                            90

=Hsin-ning=, China. 22N. 108E.                                84

=Hsin-tu=, China. 31N. 104E.                                  84

=Hsin-yang=, China. 32N. 114E.                                83

=Hsi-ping=, China. 33N. 114E.                                 83

=Hsiung-erh-shan=, China. 34N. 110E.                          82

=Hsiung-yao=, Manchuria. 40N. 122E.                           90

=Hsiu-yen=, Manchuria. 40N. 123E.                             90

=Hsi-ying-tze=, China. 41N. 114E.                             83

=Hsu=, China. 34N. 114E.                                      83

=Hsu-chau=, China. 34N. 117E.                                 83

=Hsuen-hwa=, China. 41N. 115E.                                83

=Hsuen-wei=, China. 26N. 104E.                                84

=Hsun-yang=, China. 33N. 110E.                                82

=Hsu-yang=, China. 28N. 106E.                                 84

=Htayan=, Malay Peninsula. 11N. 99E.                          71

=Hua-muong=, Indo-China. 20N. 104E.                           70

[*]=Hubli=, Bombay. 15N. 75E.                                 57

=Hu-chau=, China. 31N. 120E.                                  85

[*]=Hue=, Indo-China. 16N. 108E.                              70

=Hugli=, Bengal. 23N. 88E.                                    61

[*]=Hugli River=, Bengal. 22N. 88E.                           61

=Hu-hun-ho=, China. 42N. 122E.                                83

=Hui-fa=, Manchuria. 43N. 126E.                               90

=Hui-fa-ho R.=, Manchuria. 43N. 127E.                         90

=Hu-kou=, China. 30N. 116E.                                   85

=Hulu Plus Mt.=, Malay Pen. 5N. 102E.                         68

=Hulu Temengoh Mt.=, Malay Pen. 5N. 102E.                     68

=Humboldt B.=, East Indies. 3S. 141E.                         75

=Humnabad=, Haidarabad. 18N. 77E.                             62

=Hun=, Indo-China. 22N. 102E.                                 70

=Hu-nan=, China. 27N. 112E.                                   84

=Hun-chun=, Manchuria. 43N. 130E.                             90

=Hung-cheng=, China. 36N. 104E.                               82

=Hung-hai=, China. 23N. 115E.                                 85

=Hung-ho=, China. 33N. 114E.                                  83

=Hunghoa=, Indo-China. 21N. 105E.                             70

=Hung-shui=, China. 25N. 107E.                                84

=Hung-tse-hu=, China. 33N. 118E.                              83

=Hung-tung=, China. 36N. 112E.                                82

=Hun-ho=, China. 42N. 123E.                                   83

=Hun-ho River=, Manchuria. 41N. 123E.                         90

=Huni=, Indo-China. 22N. 104E.                                70

=Hunter Bay=, Burma. 20N. 93E.                                67

=Hun-yuen=, China. 40N. 114E.                                 83

=Huon Gulf=, East Indies. 7S. 147E.                           75

=Hu-peh=, China. 31N. 113E.                                   84

=Hu-pu=, Mongolia. 44N. 119E.                                 83

=Hurapa=, Punjab. 31N. 73E.                                   58

=Hurda=, Central Provs. 22N. 77E.                             60

=Hursola=, Bombay. 23N. 73E.                                  56

=Hurupirayama=, Japan. 43N. 140E.                             88

=Hushungabad=, Central India. 23N. 78E.                       60

=Hu-tau Bay=, China. 24N. 118E.                               85

=Hu-to-ho=, China. 38N. 114E.                                 83

=Hu-to-ho=, China. 38N. 116E.                                 83

=Huttah=, Haidarabad. 19N. 77E.                               62

=Hu-yang-pu=, China. 37N. 107E.                               82

=Hwa=, China. 21N. 110E.                                      84

=Hwai=, China. 33N. 117E.                                     83

=Hwai-ho=, China. 32N. 115E.                                  83

=Hwai-king=, China. 35N. 113E.                                82

=Hwai-ngan=, China. 34N. 119E.                                83

=Hwai-to=, Manchuria. 44N. 125E.                              90

=Hwai-yang-shan=, China. 32N. 114E.                           83

=Hwai-yin=, Manchuria. 41N. 126E.                             90

=Hwai-yuen=, China. 25N. 109E.                                84

=Hwai-yuen=, China. 38N. 109E.                                82

=Hwa-ma-chi=, China. 38N. 107E.                               82

=Hwan=, China. 36N. 107E.                                     82

=Hwang=, China. 22N. 109E.                                    84

=Hwang=, China. 38N. 121E.                                    83

=Hwang-chau=, China. 30N. 115E.                               85

=Hwang-Hai=, Korea. 38N. 126E.                                90

=Hwang-ho=, China. 38N. 118E.                                 83

=Hwang-hwa-shan=, China. 40N. 113E.                           82

=Hwang-ngan=, China. 31N. 115E.                               85

=Hwang-shan Mt.=, China. 30N. 118E.                           85

=Hwanh-ho=, Indo-China. 21N. 107E.                            70

=Hwan-ho=, China. 36N. 107E.                                  82

=Hwa-ping=, China. 35N. 106E.                                 82

=Hwei-chang=, China. 25N. 116E.                               85

=Hwei-chau=, China. 23N. 114E.                                85

=Hwei-chau=, China. 30N. 119E.                                85

=Hwei-ho=, China. 34N. 120E.                                  83

=Hwei-lai=, China. 23N. 116E.                                 85

=Hyang-ju=, Korea. 39N. 126E.                                 90


=Iamsk=, Siberia. 60N. 155E.                                  95

=Iba=, Philippine Islands. 16N. 120E.                         77

=Ibi Gamin=, United Provs. 31N. 80E.                          60

=Icarog Mt.=, Philippine Is. 14N. 123W.                       77

=I-chang=, China. 31N. 111E.                                  84

=I-chau=, China. 35N. 118E.                                   83

=I-chau=, China. 42N. 121E.                                   83

=I-chhen=, Korea. 38N. 127E.                                  90

=Ichibusayama=, Japan. 32N. 131E.                             89

=Ichinomiya=, Japan. 35N. 141E.                               91

=I-chwan=, China. 36N. 110E.                                  82

=Ida=, Japan. 35N. 138E.                                      91

[*]=Ida Mountains=, Asia Minor. 40N. 27E.                     46

=Idar=, Bombay. 24N. 73E.                                     56

=Idzuhara=, Japan. 34N. 130E.                                 89

=Idzumi=, Japan. 34N. 135E.                                   91

=Idzumo=, Japan. 35N. 133E.                                   91

=Ieros=, Asia Minor. 41N. 39E.                                47

=Ifalik=, East Indies. 6N. 145E.                              75

=Ihiya-shima=, Lu-Chu Is. 27N. 128E.                          89

=Ikeda=, Japan. 34N. 134E.                                    91

=Iki Island=, Japan. 34N. 130E.                               89

=I-kiang River=, China. 25N. 110E.                            84

=Ikuno=, Japan. 35N. 135E.                                    91

=Ilgun=, Asia Minor. 38N. 32E.                                46

=Iligan, Mindanao=, Philippine Is. 8N. 124E.                  77

=Iligan B., Mindanao=, Philippine Is. 8N. 124E.               77

=Ili, River=, Asiatic Russia. 46N. 75E.                       94

=Illana B., Mindanao=, Philippine Is. 8N. 123E.               77

=Iloilo=, Philippine Islands. 11N. 123E.                      77

=Imaharu=, Japan. 34N. 133E.                                  91

=Imbro Island=, Asia Minor. 40N. 26E.                         46

=Imen-po=, Manchuria. 45N. 128E.                              90

=Inaba=, Japan. 35N. 134E.                                    91

=Inaba Sound=, Japan. 34N. 139E.                              91

=Inawashiro=, Japan. 38N. 140E.                               91

=Indapur=, Bombay. 18N. 75E.                                  57

=Indigirka River=, Siberia. 71N. 150E.                        95

=Indore=, Haidarabad. 19N. 78E.                               62

=Indramayu=, Java. 6S. 108E.                                  76

=Indrawutty R.=, Central Provs. 19N. 81E.                     60

=Indus River=, Sind. 24N. 68E.                                59

=Ineboli=, Asia Minor. 42N. 34E.                              46

=I-ning=, China. 29N. 115E.                                   85

=Injeh Cape=, Asia Minor. 42N. 35E.                           46

=Insarevo=, Siberia. 62N. 88E.                                94

=Inuboye Cape=, Japan. 36N. 141E.                             91

=Iot Point=, Philippine Is. 14N. 124E.                        77

=Iott-so-tone=, Siam. 16N. 104E.                              70

=Ipoh=, Malay Peninsula. 5N. 101E.                            68

=Irawadi=, Burma. 17N. 95E.                                   67

=Irawadi River=, Burma. 16N. 95E.                             67

=Iren Dubassu=, Inner Mongolia. 44N. 111E.                    82

=Iren Lake=, Inner Mongolia. 44N. 112E.                       82

=Iren-tala Steppe=, Inner Mongolia. 44N. 113E.                82

=Iriomoto-shima=, Lu-Chu Is. 24N. 124E.                       89

[*]=Irkutsk=, Siberia. 52N. 104E.                             94

=Iro Cape=, Japan. 35N. 139E.                                 91

=Irtish, River=, Siberia. 61N. 70E.                           94

=Isabela, Basilan=, Philippine Is. 7N. 122E.                  77

=Isakhet=, Punjab. 33N. 71E.                                  58

=Isbarta=, Asia Minor. 38N. 30E.                              46

=Ise=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                      91

=I-shan=, China. 36N. 118E.                                   83

=Ishigaki=, Lu-Chu Island. 24N. 124E.                         89

=Ishigaki-shima=, Lu-Chu Is. 24N. 124E.                       89

=Ishikari Bay=, Japan. 43N. 141E.                             88

=Ishikari River=, Japan. 43N. 141E.                           88

=Ishim=, Siberia. 56N. 70E.                                   94

=Ishimo Cape=, Japan. 34N. 136E.                              91

=Ishinomaki=, Japan. 38N. 141E.                               88

=Iskelib=, Asia Minor. 41N. 35E.                              46

=Iskenderun=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 36E.                       46

=Iskenderun, G. of=, Asia Minor. 37N. 36E.                    46

=Islamabad=, Burma. 22N. 92E.                                 61

=Islamabad=, Kashmir. 34N. 75E.                               58

=Islamgurh=, Punjab. 28N. 71E.                                59

=Islamkot=, Sind. 25N. 70E.                                   59

[*]=Ismid=, Asia Minor. 41N. 30E.                             46

[*]=Isnik=, Asia Minor. 40N. 30E.                             46

[*]=Ispahan=, Persia. 33N. 52E.                               45

=Issachar=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                              12

=Issyk Kul, Lake=, As. Russia. 43N. 78E.                      94

=Itaburi=, Siam. 15N. 100E.                                   70

=Itako=, Japan. 36N. 141E.                                    91

=Itchapur=, Madras. 19N. 85E.                                 62

=Itoigawa=, Japan. 37N. 138E.                                 91

=I-tu=, China. 30N. 111E.                                     84

=I-tung=, Manchuria. 43N. 125E.                               90

=Ituræa=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                                13

=Iwaki=, Japan. 37N. 141E.                                    91

=Iwakuni=, Japan. 34N. 132E.                                  91

=Iwami=, Japan. 35N. 132E.                                    91

=Iwanuma=, Japan. 38N. 141E.                                  88

=Iwashiro=, Japan. 38N. 140E.                                 91

=Iwoshima=, Japan. 31N. 130E.                                 89

=Iyama=, Japan. 37N. 138E.                                    91

=I-yang=, China. 34N. 112E.                                   82

=Iyeshima=, Lu-Chu Island. 27N. 128E.                         89

=Iyo=, Japan. 34N. 133E.                                      91

=Iyo Nada=, Japan. 34N. 132E.                                 89

=Izu=, Japan. 35N. 139E.                                      91


=Jabalpur=, Central Provs. 23N. 80E.                          60

[*]=Jabbok, River=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                      12

=Jabesh Gilead=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                         12

=Jabneh=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                12

=Jacobabad=, Sind. 28N. 68E.                                  59

=Jacob's Well=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                          12

=Jafarabad=, Bombay. 21N. 71E.                                56

=Jafarabad=, Haidarabad. 20N. 76E.                            62

=Jaffua=, Ceylon. 10N. 80E.                                   63

=Jagannath=, Bengal. 20N. 86E.                                60

=Jagdalpur=, Central Provs. 19N. 82E.                         60

=Jahla R.=, Turkey in Asia. 34N. 45E.                         47

=Jaintia Hills=, Assam. 26N. 92E.                             61

=Jaintiapuri=, Assam. 25N. 92E.                               61

=Jaintu=, Bengal. 27N. 90E.                                   61

=Jaipur=, Assam. 27N. 95E.                                    67

=Jaisalmer=, Rajputana. 27N. 71E.                             59

=Jajepur=, Bengal. 21N. 86E.                                  61

=Jakhau=, Bombay. 23N. 69E.                                   56

=J-Akhdar=, Arabia. 23N. 57E.                                 45

[*]=Jalalabad=, Afghanistan. 34N. 70E.                        58

=Jalalpur=, United Provinces. 26N. 80E.                       60

[*]=Jalandhar=, Punjab. 31N. 76E.                             58

=Jalandhar=, Punjab. 32N. 77E.                                58

=Jalaun=, United Provinces. 26N. 79E.                         60

=Jalk=, Persia. 27N. 62E.                                     45

=Jalna=, Haidarabad. 20N. 76E.                                62

=Jalpaiguri=, Bengal. 27N. 89E.                               61

=Jalurpetta=, Haidarabad. 17N. 80E.                           62

=Jamba=, Malay Peninsula. 7N. 101E.                           68

=Jambusar=, Bombay. 22N. 73E.                                 56

=Jammu=, Kashmir. 33N. 75E.                                   58

=Jamnagar=, Bombay. 23N. 70E.                                 56

=Jamnia=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                13

=Jamrud=, N.W. Frontier Prov. 34N. 72E.                       58

=Janjira=, Bombay. 18N. 73E.                                  57

=Janmir=, Bombay. 21N. 72E.                                   56

=Jano=, Punjab. 34N. 72E.                                     58

=Jao-chau=, China. 29N. 117E.                                 85

=Japara=, Java. 6S. 111E.                                     76

=Japha=, Nepal. 28N. 87E.                                     61

=Japhia=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                                12

=Japho=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                 12

=Jappen=, East Indies. 2S. 136E.                              75

=Jaraila=, Rajputana. 27N. 71E.                               59

=Jaratai-dabassu=, Inner Mongolia. 40N. 105E.                 82

=Jasak=, Inner Mongolia. 39N. 110E.                           82

=Jask=, Persia. 26N. 58E.                                     45

=Jath=, Bombay. 17N. 75E.                                     57

=Jattir=, Palestine. 31N. 35E.                                12

=Jaunpur=, United Provs. 26N. 82E.                            60

=Java Head=, Java. 7S. 105E.                                  76

=Java Island=, East Indies. 7S. 110E.                         74

=Java Sea=, East Indies. 5S. 110E.                            74

=Jawad=, Rajputana. 25N. 75E.                                 59

=Jawhar=, Bombay. 20N. 73E.                                   57

=Jaypur=, Madras. 19N. 83E.                                   62

[*]=Jaypur=, Rajputana. 27N. 76E.                             59

=Jazer=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                                 12

=Jeat=, Haidarabad. 19N. 76E.                                 62

=Jebel Shomer=, Arabia. 28N. 42E.                             44

=Jehlam=, Punjab. 33N. 74E.                                   58

=Jelapur=, Bombay. 15N. 75E.                                  57

=Jelei River=, Malay Peninsula. 4N. 102E.                     68

=Jellei River=, Borneo. 3S. 111E.                             76

=Jelo Dagh=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 44E.                        47

=Jen-hwai=, China. 28N. 106E.                                 84

[*]=Jericho=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                            12

=Jerraguntha=, Madras. 15N. 79E.                              62

=Jerrahi=, Persia. 31N. 49E.                                  47

[*]=Jerusalem=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                          12

=Jesselton=, East Indies. 6N. 116E.                           74

=Jessore=, Bengal. 23N. 89E.                                  61

=Jezreel=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                               12

[*]=Jezreel, Valley of=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                 12

=Jhal=, Baluchistan. 28N. 67E.                                59

=Jhalore=, Rajputana. 25N. 73E.                               59

=Jhalrapatam=, Rajputana. 24N. 76E.                           59

=Jhang Maghiana=, Punjab. 31N. 72E.                           58

[*]=Jhansi=, Central India. 26N. 79E.                         60

[*]=Jhelum River=, Punjab. 31N. 72E.                          58

=Jhow=, Baluchistan. 26N. 66E.                                45

=Jhudo=, Sind. 25N. 69E.                                      59

=Jhunjhnu=, Rajputana. 28N. 75E.                              59

[*]=Jidda=, Arabia. 22N. 39E.                                 44

=Jigansk=, Siberia. 67N. 123E.                                95

=Jijurt=, Bombay. 18N. 74E.                                   57

[*]=Jind=, Punjab. 29N. 76E.                                  59

=Jizou Cape=, Japan. 36N. 133E.                               91

=Jodhpur=, Rajputana. 26N. 73E.                               59

=Jof=, Arabia. 31N. 41E.                                      44

=Jogbani=, Bengal. 26N. 87E.                                  61

=Johor=, Malay Peninsula. 2N. 103E.                           69

=Johor Bharu=, Malay Pen. 2N. 104E.                           69

=Johore=, East Indies. 2N. 104E.                              74

=Johor Lama=, Malay Pen. 2N. 104E.                            69

=Johor River=, Malay Pen. 2N. 104E.                           69

=Jokneam=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                               12

=Jokyakarta=, Java. 8S. 110E.                                 76

=Jollarpett=, Madras. 13N. 79E.                               63

[*]=Joonir=, Bombay. 19N. 74E.                                57

=Joppa=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                 13

=Jorhat=, Assam. 27N. 94E.                                    67

=Joseph's Tomb=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                         12

=Jubeileh=, Turkey in Asia. 32N.                              47

=Judi Dagh=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 43E.                        47

=Julamerk=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 43E.                         47

=Julfa=, Persia. 32N. 52E.                                    45

=Jumba=, Nepal. 29N. 82E.                                     60

=Jumkundi=, Bombay. 17N. 75E.                                 57

=Jumna R.=, United Provs. 26N. 82E.                           60

=Jumpul, Cape=, Sumatra. 3N. 100E.                            69

=Junagarh=, Bombay. 22N. 70E.                                 56

=Junagarh=, Central Provs. 20N. 83E.                          60

=Jungar=, Inner Mongolia. 40N. 111E.                          82

=Junkseylon Is.=, Malay Pen. 8N. 98E.                         71

=Jurah=, Rajputana. 25N. 73E.                                 59

=Jushpur=, Bengal. 22N. 84E.                                  60

=Juttah=, Palestine. 31N. 35E.                                12


=Kabadian=, Bokhara. 37N. 68E.                                45

=Kabarovski=, Siberia. 48N. 135E.                             95

=Kabend=, Persia. 27N. 53E.                                   45

=Kabin=, Siam. 14N. 102E.                                     71

=Kabul R.=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 34N. 72E.                    58

=Kachar=, Assam. 25N. 93E.                                    67

=Kachhi=, Baluchistan. 29N. 68E.                              59

=Kachin=, Burma. 26N. 97E.                                    67

=Kachiyama=, Japan. 35N. 140E.                                91

=Kadarpur=, Punjab. 32N. 72E.                                 58

=Kadiri=, Madras. 14N. 78E.                                   63

=Kadraman=, Bombay. 21N. 73E.                                 56

=Kadsa=, Rajputana. 27N. 73E.                                 59

=Kadur=, Mysore. 14N. 76E.                                    63

=Kafiristan=, Afghanistan. 35N. 70E.                          58

=Kaga=, Japan. 36N. 137E.                                     91

=Kagi=, Formosa. 23N. 120E.                                   89

=Kagoshima=, Japan. 31N. 131E.                                89

=Kagoshima, Great=, Japan. 31N. 131E.                         89

=Kaha River=, Punjab. 30N. 70E.                               58

=Kai=, China. 27N. 107E.                                      84

=Kai=, Japan. 36N. 139E.                                      91

=Kai-feng=, China. 35N. 114E.                                 83

=Kai-ho=, Manchuria. 43N. 130E.                               90

=Kai-hua=, China. 23N. 104E.                                  84

=Kain=, Persia. 33N. 59E.                                     45

=Kainsk=, Siberia. 56N. 78E.                                  94

=Kai-ping=, Manchuria. 40N. 122E.                             90

=Kai-ping Island=, China. 22N. 114E.                          85

=Kaira=, Bombay. 23N. 73E.                                    56

=Kaisarieh=, Asia Minor. 39N. 35E.                            46

=Kai-seng=, Korea. 38N. 126E.                                 90

=Kaiser Wilhelm's Land=, East Indies. 5S. 143E.               75

[*]=Kaithal=, Punjab. 30N. 76E.                               58

=Kai-yuen=, Manchuria. 43N. 124E.                             90

=Kajang=, Malay Peninsula. 3N. 102E.                          69

=Kajikazawa=, Japan. 36N. 139E.                               91

=Kajiki=, Japan. 32N. 130E.                                   89

=Kakya=, Burma. 25N. 98E.                                     67

=Kakeroma-shima=, Lu-Chu Island. 29N. 129E.                   89

=Kalabagh=, Punjab. 33N. 72E.                                 58

=Kaladji=, Bombay. 16N. 75E.                                  57

=Kala Drosh=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 35N. 72E.                  58

=Kalam=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 35N. 73E.                       58

=Kala Nao=, Afghanistan. 35N. 63E.                            45

=Kalapa Island=, Java. 7S. 105E.                              76

=Kalapani=, Punjab. 33N. 73E.                                 58

=Kalassim=, Siam. 17N. 104E.                                  70

[*]=Kalat=, Baluchistan. 29N. 67E.                            45

=Kalat=, Turkey in Asia. 36N. 38E.                            47

=Kalat en Nejm=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 38E.                    47

=Kalat Ramadi=, Turkey in Asia. 34N. 43E.                     47

=Kalegouk Island=, Burma. 16N. 98E.                           67

=Kalessi=, Asia Minor. 40N. 27E.                              46

=Kalewa=, Burma. 23N. 94E.                                    67

=Kali River=, United Provs. 29N. 79E.                         60

=Kaliganj=, Bengal. 25N. 90E.                                 61

=Kali Sind R.=, Central India. 25N. 76E.                      60

=Kaliuchin Bay=, Siberia. 67N. 176W.                          95

=Kalivan=, Siberia. 56N. 82E.                                 94

=Kalka=, Punjab. 31N. 77E.                                    58

=Kalpentyn=, Ceylon. 8N. 80E.                                 63

=Kalurkot=, Punjab. 32N. 71E.                                 58

=Kalutura=, Ceylon. 7N. 80E.                                  63

[*]=Kalyan=, Bombay. 19N. 73E.                                57

=Kama=, Burma. 19N. 95E.                                      67

=Kama=, Burma. 26N. 96E.                                      67

[*]=Kamagawa=, Japan. 36N. 140E.                              91

=Kamaishi=, Japan. 39N. 142E.                                 88

=Kamamet=, Haidarabad. 17N. 80E.                              62

=Kamaran Island=, Red Sea. 15N. 43E.                          44

=Kambangan=, Java. 8S. 109E.                                  76

=Kambing, Port=, East Indies. 8S. 125E.                       75

=Kametsu=, Lu-Chu Islands. 28N. 129E.                         89

=Kamitsu Shima=, Japan. 34N. 139E.                            91

=Kamla River=, Bengal. 26N. 87E.                              61

=Kamok=, Punjab. 32N. 74E.                                    58

=Kamon-taung=, Burma. 26N. 97E.                               67

=Kampali=, Haidarabad. 15N. 77E.                              62

=Kampang=, Siam. 16N. 100E.                                   70

=Kamparg=, Siam. 17N. 99E.                                    70

=Kampot=, Indo-China. 11N. 104E.                              71

=Kamta=, Bombay. 14N. 74E.                                    57

=Kamtchatka=, Siberia. 58N. 160E.                             95

=Kamtchatka, G. of=, Siberia. 55N. 163E.                      95

=Kamthi=, Central Provinces. 21N. 79E.                        60

=Kamuizaki=, Japan. 43N. 140E.                                88

=Kanah=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                                 13

=Kanah, Brook=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                          12

=Kanazawa=, Japan. 37N. 137E.                                 91

=Kanburi=, Siam. 14N. 100E.                                   71

=Kan-chau=, China. 26N. 115E.                                 85

=Kanchinjinga, Mt.=, Sikkim. 28N. 88E.                        61

[*]=Kandahar=, Afghanistan. 32N. 66E.                         45

[*]=Kandy=, Ceylon. 7N. 81E.                                  63

=Kanga=, Malay Peninsula. 6N. 100E.                           68

=Kangall=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 37E.                          46

=Kangawa=, Japan. 35N. 140E.                                  91

=Kangean Island=, E. Indies. 7S. 115E.                        76

=Kang-ge=, Korea. 41N. 126E.                                  90

[*]=Kang-hwa=, Korea. 38N. 127E.                              90

[*]=Kang-ping=, China. 43N. 123E.                             83

=Kangra=, Punjab. 32N. 76E.                                   58

=Kang-seng=, Korea. 38N. 128E.                                90

=Kang-wen=, Korea. 37N. 128E.                                 90

=Kani=, Burma. 22N. 95E.                                      67

=Kanigurum=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 33N. 70E.                   58

=Kankari=, Asia Minor. 41N. 34E.                              46

=Kankasanturia=, Ceylon. 10N. 80E.                            63

=Kanker=, Central Provs. 20N. 82E.                            60

=Kan-kiang River=, China. 27N. 115E.                          85

=Kankupa=, Mysore. 15N. 76E.                                  62

=Kanmitake=, Japan. 42N. 143E.                                88

=Kan-ngen=, China. 19N. 109E.                                 84

=Kanpetlet=, Burma. 21N. 94E.                                 67

=Kansaw=, Burma. 25N. 96E.                                    67

=Kan-su=, China. 36N. 105E.                                   82

=Kan-tung-shan=, China. 31N. 116E.                            85

=Kanuma=, Japan. 37N. 140E.                                   91

=Kan-yu=, China. 35N. 119E.                                   83

=Kao-chau=, China. 22N. 111E.                                 84

=Kao Kwang=, Malay Pen. 9N. 100E.                             71

=Kao Luong=, Malay Peninsula. 8N. 99E.                        71

=Kao-mi=, China. 36N. 120E.                                   83

=Kao-pan-tzu=, Manchuria. 42N. 122E.                          90

=Kao Prong=, Malay Peninsula. 9N. 99E.                        71

=Kao-yu-hu=, China. 33N. 119E.                                83

=Kapalu=, Kashmir. 35N. 76E.                                  58

=Kap-san=, Korea. 41N. 128E.                                  90

=Kapsi=, Haidarabad. 19N. 77E.                                62

=Kapuas River=, East Indies. 0. 110E.                         74

=Kara Sea=, Siberia. 73N. 65E.                                94

=Karaboghaz G.=, Turkestan. 43N. 54E.                         45

[*]=Karachi=, Sind. 25N. 67E.                                 59

=Kara Dagh=, Asia Minor. 37N. 33E.                            46

=Karadagh=, Persia. 39N.                                      47

=Karafuto Island=, Siberia. 50N. 143E.                        95

=Karaginski Island=, Siberia. 59N. 164E.                      95

=Kara Hissar=, Asia Minor. 38N. 30E.                          46

=Karahissar=, Turkey in Asia. 40N. 39E.                       47

=Kara Magora=, Asia Minor. 39N. 36E.                          46

=Karaman=, Asia Minor. 37N. 33E.                              46

=Karang=, Java. 6S. 106E.                                     76

=Karanpur=, Punjab. 33N. 73E.                                 58

=Karar=, Bombay. 17N. 74E.                                    57

=Kararizaki=, Lu-Chu Island. 29N. 130E.                       89

=Karasu=, Persia. 35N. 50E.                                   47

=Kara su=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 40E.                          47

=Karategin=, Bokhara. 38N. 70E.                               45

=Karatsu=, Japan. 33N. 130E.                                  89

=Karauli=, Rajputana. 26N. 77E.                               59

=Karenko=, Formosa. 24N. 122E.                                89

=Karenni=, Burma. 19N. 97E.                                   67

=Kargil=, Kashmir. 35N. 76E.                                  58

[*]=Karikal=, Madras. 11N. 80E.                               63

=Karimata Is.=, East Indies. 1S. 109E.                        74

=Karimnagar=, Haidarabad. 18N. 79E.                           62

=Karimon Java Is.=, Java. 6S. 110E.                           76

=Kariya=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                   91

=Karkalinsk=, As. Russia. 50N. 75E.                           94

=Karnal=, Punjab. 30N. 77E.                                   58

=Karnaphuti River=, Burma. 22N. 92E.                          61

=Karnul=, Madras. 16N. 78E.                                   62

=Karpathos=, Asia Minor. 36N. 27E.                            46

=Karshi=, Bokhara. 38N. 66E.                                  45

=Karskaya Gulf=, Siberia. 69N. 68E.                           94

=Kartaksho=, Kashmir. 35N. 76E.                               58

[*]=Karur=, Madras. 11N. 78E.                                 63

=Karwar=, Bombay. 15N. 74E.                                   57

=Kas, Gulf of=, Asia Minor. 37N.                              46

=Kasai River=, Bengal. 22N. 88E.                              61

=Kasaoka=, Japan. 35N. 133E.                                  91

=Kasara=, Bombay. 20N. 74E.                                   57

=Kashan=, Persia. 34N. 52E.                                   45

=Kashiwasaki=, Japan. 37N. 139E.                              91

[*]=Kashmir=, Kashmir. 34N. 75E.                              58

=Kashoto=, Formosa. 22N. 121E.                                89

=Kasim=, Arabia. 27N. 45E.                                    44

=Kasmore=, Sind. 28N. 70E.                                    59

=Kasos=, Asia Minor. 35N. 27E.                                46

=Kasri-Shirin=, Persia. 35N. 46E.                             47

=Kassabi=, Asia Minor. 38N. 27E.                              46

=Kassot=, Malay Peninsula. 6N. 101E.                          68

=Kastamuni=, Asia Minor. 41N. 34E.                            46

=Kasukabe=, Japan. 36N. 140E.                                 91

[*]=Kasur=, Punjab. 31N. 75E.                                 58

=Katapang=, East Indies. 7S. 115E.                            76

=Katar=, Sind. 27N. 69E.                                      59

=Katar=, Arabia. 25N. 51E.                                    45

=Katarnai Ghat=, United Provs. 28N. 81E.                      60

=Katha=, Burma. 24N. 96E.                                     67

=Kathiawar Pen.=, Bombay. 22N. 71E.                           56

=Katiuchin Bay=, Siberia. 67N. 176E.                          95

=Katmandu=, Nepal. 28N. 86E.                                  60

=Katni=, Central India. 24N. 80E.                             60

=Katolli=, Rajputana. 26N. 76E.                               59

=Katsura=, Japan. 35N. 140E.                                  91

=Katsuyama=, Japan. 36N. 137E.                                91

=Kattaria=, Bombay. 23N. 71E.                                 56

=Kauer=, East Indies. 5S. 103E.                               74

=Kau-yu=, China. 33N. 120E.                                   83

=Kawabe-Shichi-to Is.=, Lu-Chu Is. 30N. 129E.                 89

=Kawachi=, Japan. 35N. 136E.                                  91

=Kawanoye=, Japan. 34N. 134E.                                 91

=Kawardha=, Central Provs. 22N. 81E.                          60

=Kawe=, Burma. 24N. 95E.                                      67

=Kawra=, Bombay. 24N. 70E.                                    56

=Kayeli=, East Indies. 3S. 127E.                              75

=Kazbin=, Persia. 37N. 50E.                                   47

=Kazusa=, Japan. 35N. 140E.                                   91

=Kebao=, Indo-China. 21N. 107E.                               70

=Kebatu Island=, East Indies. 4S. 108E.                       76

=Kebumen=, Java. 8S. 110E.                                    76

=Kechau River=, Malay Pen. 4N. 102E.                          68

=Kedah River=, Malay Pen. 6N. 100E.                           68

=Kedesh=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                                12

=Kediri=, Java. 8S. 112E.                                     76

=Kedron=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                12

=Kedu=, Java. 7S. 110E.                                       76

=Kega, Cape=, Indo-China. 11N. 108E.                          71

=Keilah=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                12

=Kejeri=, Bengal. 22N. 88E.                                   61

=Kekri=, Rajputana. 26N. 75E.                                 59

=Kelantan=, Malay Peninsula. 5N. 102E.                        68

=Kelantan River=, Malay Pen. 6N. 102E.                        68

=Kelenderi=, Asia Minor. 36N. 33E.                            46

=Kelkit=, Asia Minor. 40N. 37E.                               46

=Ke-lung=, Formosa. 25N. 122E.                                89

=Kema=, East Indies. 2N. 125E.                                75

=Kemmarat=, Siam. 16N. 105E.                                  70

=Ken River=, United Provinces. 26N. 80E.                      60

=Kendal=, Java. 7S. 110E.                                     76

=Kendari=, East Indies. 4S. 122E.                             74

=Ken Lao=, Siam. 18N. 101E.                                   70

=Kentei-alin=, Manchuria. 45N. 130E.                          90

=Keonjurgurh=, Bengal. 22N. 86E.                              60

=Kerama-shima=, Lu-Chu Is. 26N. 127E.                         89

=Keramian Is.=, East Indies. 5S. 115E.                        76

=Kerasun=, Asia Minor. 41N. 39E.                              47

=Keratong=, Malay Peninsula. 3N. 103E.                        69

[*]=Kerbela=, Turkey in Asia. 33N. 44E.                       47

=Kerempeh Cape=, Asia Minor. 42N. 33E.                        46

=Kerioth=, Palestine. 31N. 35E.                               12

=Kerkesiyeh=, Turkey in Asia. 35N. 40E.                       47

=Kerkhad=, Persia. 32N. 48E.                                  47

[*]=Kerkouk=, Turkey in Asia. 35N. 44E.                       47

=Kerman=, Persia. 30N. 56E.                                   45

=Kermanshad=, Persia. 34N.                                    47

=Kermes=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 37E.                           46

=Keshin=, Arabia. 15N. 52E.                                   45

=Ketapang=, East Indies. 2S. 110E.                            74

=Keum-kang-san=, Korea. 38N. 128E.                            90

=Kevir=, Persia. 35N. 55E.                                    45

=Khabour=, Turkey in Asia. 36N. 41E.                          47

[*]=Khaibar Pass=, Afghanistan. 34N. 71E.                     58

=Khaiber=, Arabia. 26N. 40E.                                  44

=Khair=, Haidarabad. 19N. 77E.                                62

=Khairagarh=, Central Provs. 21N. 81E.                        60

=Khairi=, Bombay. 19N. 74E.                                   57

=Khairpur=, Sind. 27N. 69E.                                   59

=Khakhi=, Persia. 34N. 59E.                                   45

=Khamar Mts.=, Mongolia. 44N. 120E.                           83

=Khamgaon=, Berar. 20N. 77E.                                  60

=Khamh-hoa=, Indo-China. 12N. 109E.                           71

=Khamiab=, Afghanistan. 37N. 66E.                             45

=Khamir=, Arabia. 16N.                                        44

=Kham-kheul=, Indo-China. 18N. 104E.                          70

=Kham-num=, Indo-China. 18N. 105E.                            70

=Kham-tong-lai=, Indo-China. 16N. 106E.                       70

=Khana Abasa=, Mongolia. 44N. 115E.                           83

=Khandwa=, Central Provs. 22N. 76E.                           60

=Khanekin=, Turkey in Asia. 34N. 45E.                         47

=Khanewal=, Punjab. 30N. 72E.                                 58

=Khangarh=, Punjab. 28N. 71E.                                 59

=Khanpur=, Punjab. 29N. 71E.                                  59

=Kharaghova=, Bombay. 23N. 72E.                               56

=Khara-mangnai Lake=, Inner Mongolia. 40N. 108E.              82

=Khara-morito=, Inner Mongolia. 40N. 105E.                    82

=Kharan=, Baluchistan. 28N. 65E.                              45

=Khara-narin-ula=, Inner Mongolia. 41N. 106E.                 82

=Khara Nor=, Inner Mongolia. 39N. 104E.                       82

=Khara-obo=, Inner Mongolia. 42N. 105E.                       82

=Kharapat=, Burma. 24N. 94E.                                  67

=Kharasom=, Assam. 25N. 95E.                                  67

=Kharbin=, Manchuria. 46N. 127E.                              90

=Kharder=, Punjab. 28N. 70E.                                  59

=Kharfa=, Arabia. 24N. 46E.                                   44

=Khariar=, Central Provs. 20N. 83E.                           60

=Kharikar=, Afghanistan. 35N. 69E.                            45

=Kharpat=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 39E.                          47

=Kharroh=, Sind. 27N. 70E.                                    59

=Kharsawan=, Bengal. 23N. 86E.                                60

=Khas=, Indo-China. 14N. 108E.                                71

=Khasi Hills=, Assam. 26N. 92E.                               61

=Khatanga Gulf=, Siberia. 75N. 110E.                          94

=Khatanga, River=, Siberia. 71N. 108E.                        94

=Khatangsk=, Siberia. 72N. 102E.                              94

=Khatchi=, Nepal. 28N. 83E.                                   60

=Khatsir=, Mongolia. 44N. 120E.                               83

=Khawak Ft.=, Afghanistan. 35N. 70E.                          58

=Khazr=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 43E.                            47

=Khenka, Lake=, Siberia. 45N. 132E.                           95

[*]=Khios=, Asia Minor. 38N. 26E.                             46

[*]=Khiva=, Turkestan. 42N. 60E.                              45

=Khobido daban=, Mongolia. 44N. 117E.                         83

=Khoi=, Persia. 39N. 45E.                                     47

=Kholu=, Baluchistan. 30N. 69E.                               58

=Khong=, Indo-China. 14N. 106E.                               71

=Khongmalong=, Burma. 27N. 98E.                               67

=Khora=, Kashmir. 35N. 77E.                                   58

=Khorasan=, Persia. 34N. 59E.                                 45

=Khoremabad=, Persia. 34N.                                    47

=Khost=, Afghanistan. 33N. 70E.                               58

=Khuduluk=, Mongolia. 44N. 118E.                              83

=Khulan-chen=, Manchuria. 46N. 127E.                          90

=Khulm=, Afghanistan. 37N. 68E.                               45

=Khurir=, Bombay. 24N. 70E.                                   56

=Khurkhu Range=, Inner Mongolia. 43N. 105E.                   82

=Khusalgarh=, Punjab. 34N. 72E.                               58

=Khyrpur=, Punjab. 30N. 72E.                                  58

=Ki=, China. 30N. 115E.                                       85

=Ki=, China. 36N. 111E.                                       82

=Ki=, China. 37N. 116E.                                       83

=Ki=, China. 38N. 115E.                                       83

=Ki=, China. 40N. 117E.                                       83

=Ki Island=, East Indies. 6S. 133E.                           75

=Kia=, China. 38N. 110E.                                      82

=Kia-hsing=, China. 31N. 121E.                                85

=Kiai=, China. 33N. 105E.                                     82

=Kiai=, China. 35N. 111E.                                     82

[*]=Kiakhta=, Siberia. 50N. 107E.                             94

=Kiang=, China. 36N. 111E.                                    82

=Kiang-hai=, Siam. 20N. 100E.                                 70

=Kiang-Khan=, Siam. 18N. 102E.                                70

=Kiang Kheng=, Burma. 21N. 101E.                              67

=Kiang-Khong=, Siam. 20N. 100E.                               70

=Kiang Kwang=, Indo-China. 19N. 103E.                         70

=Kiang-pei=, China. 30N. 106E.                                84

=Kiang-Sen=, Siam. 20N. 100E.                                 70

=Kiang-shan=, China. 29N. 119E.                               85

=Kiang-si=, China. 27N. 116E.                                 85

=Kiang-su=, China. 33N. 120E.                                 83

=Kiang-tan-ho River=, China. 29N. 108E.                       84

=Kiang Tung=, Burma. 21N. 100E.                               67

=Kiao-chau=, China. 36N. 120E.                                83

=Kiao-chau Bay=, China. 36N. 120E.                            83

=Kia-ting=, China. 30N. 104E.                                 84

=Kia-ting-kiang R.=, China. 31N. 106E.                        84

=Kia-ying=, China. 24N. 116E.                                 85

=Kidarnath Mt.=, United Provs. 31N. 79E.                      60

=Kidzuki=, Japan. 35N. 133E.                                  91

=Kien=, China. 32N. 106E.                                     84

=Kien=, China. 34N. 108E.                                     82

=Kien-chang=, China. 27N. 117E.                               85

=Kien-chang=, China. 29N. 116E.                               85

=Kien-chang=, China. 41N. 119E.                               83

=Kien-chau=, China. 28N. 109E.                                84

=Kien-ning=, China. 27N. 118E.                                85

=Kien-shi=, China. 31N. 110E.                                 84

=Kien-te=, China. 30N. 117E.                                  85

=Kien-yang=, China. 27N. 118E.                                85

=Kie-shi=, China. 23N. 116E.                                  85

=Kii=, Japan. 34N. 136E.                                      91

=Kii Chan=, Japan. 34N. 135E.                                 91

=Ki-kiang=, China. 29N. 107E.                                 84

=Kil-ju=, Korea. 41N. 129E.                                   90

=Ki-men=, China. 30N. 118E.                                   85

=Kin-chang-kau=, China. 42N. 120E.                            83

=Kin-chau=, China. 22N. 108E.                                 84

=Kin-chau=, China. 41N. 121E.                                 83

=Kin-chau=, Manchuria. 39N. 121E.                             90

=Kindat=, Burma. 24N. 95E.                                    67

=King=, China. 35N. 107E.                                     82

=King=, China. 38N. 116E.                                     83

=King Island=, Burma. 12N. 98E.                               71

=Kinga, Cape=, Siberia. 63N. 180E.                            95

=Ki-ngan=, China. 27N. 115E.                                  85

=King-chau=, China. 30N. 112E.                                84

=King-men=, China. 31N. 112E.                                 84

[*]=King-te-shen=, China. 29N. 117E.                          85

=King-yang=, China. 36N. 108E.                                82

=King-yuen=, China. 24N. 108E.                                84

=Kin-hwa=, China. 29N. 120E.                                  85

=Kinibalu Mt.=, East Indies. 6N. 116E.                        74

=Kin-kiang River=, China. 28N. 117E.                          85

=Kinkwazan=, Japan. 38N. 142E.                                88

=Kinsan=, Afghanistan. 33N. 67E.                              58

=Kinta S.=, Malay Peninsula. 4N. 101E.                        68

=Kioga Cape=, Japan. 36N. 135E.                               91

=Kiong-heung=, Korea. 42N. 130E.                              90

[*]=Kioto=, Japan. 35N. 136E.                                 91

=Kirenga, River=, Siberia. 58N. 108E.                         94

=Kirensk=, Siberia. 58N. 108E.                                94

=Kirin=, Manchuria. 44N. 127E.                                90

=Kirin=, Manchuria. 45N. 128E.                                90

=Kirishima=, Japan. 32N. 132E.                                89

=Kir Moab=, Palestine. 31N. 36E.                              12

=Kisanto=, Formosa. 25N. 122E.                                89

=Kishangarh=, Rajputana. 27N. 75E.                            59

=Kishangarh=, Rajputana. 28N. 71E.                            59

=Kishani River=, Afghanistan. 32N. 67E.                       58

=Kishen River=, Kashmir. 34N. 74E.                            58

=Kishim Island=, Persia. 26N. 56E.                            45

=Kishinowada=, Japan. 34N. 135E.                              91

=Kishnagherry=, Madras. 13N. 78E.                             63

[*]=Kishon, River=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                      12

=Ki-shui=, China. 27N. 115E.                                  85

=Kislim Is.=, Persian Gulf. 27N. 56E.                         45

=Kisogawa=, Japan. 36N. 138E.                                 91

=Kissengunge=, Bengal. 26N. 88E.                              61

=Kistawar=, Kashmir. 33N. 76E.                                58

=Kitab=, Bokhara. 39N. 67E.                                   45

=Kitakami=, Japan. 40N. 141E.                                 88

=Kit-tha-reng=, Burma. 12N. 99E.                              71

=Kitur=, Bombay. 16N. 75E.                                    57

=Kiu-chau=, China. 29N. 119E.                                 85

=Kiu-kiang=, China. 30N. 116E.                                85

=Kiu-kung-shan=, China. 29N. 115E.                            85

=Kiu-lung-kiang R.=, China. 24N. 118E.                        85

=Kiung-chau=, China. 20N. 111E.                               84

=Kiyamuzaki=, Lu-Chu Is. 26N. 128E.                           89

=Kizil Arvat=, Turkestan. 39N. 56E.                           45

=Kizil Irmak R.=, Asia Minor. 40N. 34E.                       46

=Kizil Uzen=, Persia. 37N. 48E.                               47

=Klaung Pak-chau R.=, Burma. 10N. 99E.                        71

=Klong Doang=, Malay Pen. 8N. 99E.                            71

[*]=Kobe=, Japan. 35N. 135E.                                  91

=Kochi=, Japan. 34N. 133E.                                    91

=Kodaka=, Japan. 38N. 141E.                                   91

=Koemari=, Ceylon. 7N. 82E.                                   63

=Kofu=, Japan. 36N. 139E.                                     91

=Koga=, Japan. 36N. 140E.                                     91

=Kohat=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 34N. 71E.                       58

=Koh Chang=, Siam. 12N. 102E.                                 71

=Koh Gram=, Malay Pen. 10N. 100E.                             71

=Koh Kong=, Indo-China. 11N. 103E.                            71

=Koh Kut=, Siam. 12N. 103E.                                   71

=Koh Pennan=, Malay Pen. 10N. 100E.                           71

=Koh Rong=, Indo-China. 11N. 103E.                            71

=Koh Samuie=, Malay Pen. 9N. 100E.                            71

=Koh Si-chang=, Siam. 13N. 101E.                              71

=Koh Tang=, Indo-China. 10N. 103E.                            71

=Koh Tau=, Malay Peninsula. 10N. 100E.                        71

=Koh Tron=, Indo-China. 10N. 104E.                            71

=Koilah=, Rajputana. 28N. 73E.                                59

=Koilkonda=, Haidarabad. 17N. 78E.                            62

=Ko-je-do=, Korea. 35N. 129E.                                 90

=Kokan=, Turkestan. 40N. 71E.                                 45

=Kokarit=, Burma. 17N. 98E.                                   67

=Kokelay=, Ceylon. 9N. 81E.                                   63

=Koktechavsk=, As. Russia. 53N. 69E.                          94

=Kokura=, Japan. 34N. 131E.                                   89

=Kolaba=, Bombay. 19N. 73E.                                   57

=Ko-lan=, China. 39N. 112E.                                   82

=Kolapur=, Bombay. 17N. 74E.                                  57

[*]=Kolar=, Mysore. 13N. 78E.                                 63

=Kolima Mts.=, Siberia. 64N. 158E.                            95

=Kolima River=, Siberia. 69N. 162E.                           95

=Kolleru Lake=, Madras. 17N. 81E.                             62

=Komagatahe=, Japan. 36N. 138E.                               91

=Komatsu=, Japan. 36N. 136E.                                  91

=Komchuk=, China. 23N. 113E.                                  85

=Komodo Is.=, East Indies. 8S. 120E.                          74

=Kompong-chenang=, Indo-China. 12N. 105E.                     71

=Kompong Thom=, Indo-China. 13N. 105E.                        71

=Komta=, Central Provs. 22N. 80E.                             60

=Ko-mung B.=, Indo-China. 14N. 109E.                          71

=Konadah=, Madras. 18N. 84E.                                  62

=Konda=, Kashmir. 35N. 75E.                                   58

[*]=Kondapalli=, Madras. 17N. 81E.                            62

=Kong-ju=, Korea. 36N. 127E.                                  90

=Kong-mun=, China. 22N. 113E.                                 85

[*]=Konieh=, Asia Minor. 38N. 33E.                            46

=Kon-ken=, Siam. 16N. 103E.                                   70

=Kon-tum=, Indo-China. 14N. 108E.                             71

=Kopah=, Malay Peninsula. 9N. 98E.                            71

=Kopah Inlet=, Malay Pen. 9N. 98E.                            71

=Kopal=, Asiatic Russia. 45N. 80E.                            94

=Korat=, Siam. 15N. 102E.                                     71

=Korea=, Bengal. 23N. 82E.                                    60

=Korea Strait=, Japan. 34N. 130E.                             89

=Korean Archipelago=, Korea. 34N. 127E.                       90

=Korido=, East Indies. 1S. 135E.                              75

=Korinar=, Bombay. 21N. 71E.                                  56

=Korinchi Mt.=, East Indies. 2S. 101E.                        74

[*]=Kos=, Asia Minor. 37N. 27E.                               46

=Koshab=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 43E.                           47

=Koshi River=, Bengal. 25N. 87E.                              61

=Koshiki-shima=, Japan. 32N. 130E.                            89

=Koshun=, Formosa. 21N. 121E.                                 89

=Kota Bharu=, Malay Pen. 6N. 101E.                            68

=Kotah=, Rajputana. 25N. 76E.                                 59

=Kotaintan=, Sumatra. 1N. 100E.                               69

=Kota Jalor=, Malay Peninsula. 7N. 101E.                      68

=Kotakara=, Lu-Chu Island. 30N. 130E.                         89

=Kota Krunei=, Malay Pen. 6N. 101E.                           68

=Kotal=, Punjab. 30N. 67E.                                    58

=Kota Pana=, Malay Peninsula. 5N. 103E.                       68

=Kotar=, United Provinces. 28N. 80E.                          60

=Kota Raja=, East Indies. 5N. 95E.                            74

=Kota Tek=, Malay Peninsula. 4N. 102E.                        68

=Kotelroi Island=, Siberia. 75N. 140E.                        95

=Kothupilli=, Madras. 17N. 82E.                               62

=Kotiam=, Madras. 10N. 76E.                                   63

=Kotli=, Kashmir. 34N. 74E.                                   58

=Kotour=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 44E.                           47

=Kotri=, Sind. 25N. 68E.                                      59

=Kotsuke=, Japan. 36N. 139E.                                  91

=Kottur=, Madras. 15N. 76E.                                   62

=Kouznitz=, Siberia. 54N. 83E.                                94

=Kow=, Malay Peninsula. 7N. 101E.                             68

=Koweit=, Arabia. 29N. 48E.                                   44

=Kowlas=, Haidarabad. 18N. 78E.                               62

=Kra=, Malay Peninsula. 11N. 99E.                             71

=Kra, Isthmus of=, Malay Pen. 10N. 99E.                       71

=Krakatoa Is.=, East Indies. 6S. 105E.                        74

=Kranji=, Malay Peninsula. 1N. 104E.                          69

=Krasnoiarsk=, Siberia. 56N. 93E.                             94

=Krasnovodsk=, Turkestan. 40N. 53E.                           45

=Krat=, Siam. 12N. 102E.                                      71

=Kratie=, Indo-China. 12N. 106E.                              71

=Krawang=, Java. 6S. 107E.                                    76

=Krian River=, Malay Pen. 5N. 100E.                           68

=Krio Cape=, Asia Minor. 36N. 27E.                            46

=Krishna River=, Madras. 16N. 81E.                            62

=Krishnagar=, Bengal. 23N. 89E.                               61

=Kronotski, Cape=, Siberia. 54N. 163E.                        95

=Krusenstern Strait=, Japan. 34N. 130E.                       89

=Ku=, China. 31N. 107E.                                       84

=Ku=, China. 36N. 119E.                                       83

=Kua Bassac R.=, Indo-China. 10N. 106E.                       71

=Kua Ham-long R.=, Indo-China. 10N. 107E.                     71

=Kua Ko-kien R.=, Indo-China. 10N. 107E.                      71

=Kuala Kangsar=, Malay Pen. 5N. 101E.                         68

=Kuala Klang=, Malay Pen. 3N. 101E.                           69

=Kuala Klawang=, Malay Pen. 3N. 102E.                         69

=Kuala Kubu=, Malay Pen. 3N. 102E.                            69

=Kuala Lipis=, Malay Pen. 4N. 102E.                           68

=Kuala Lumpur=, Malay Pen. 3N. 102E.                          69

=Kuala Pilah=, Malay Pen. 3N. 102E.                           69

=Kuala Semantan=, Malay Pen. 3N. 102E.                        69

=Kuala Sembrong=, Malay Pen. 2N. 104E.                        69

=Kuantan River=, Malay Pen. 4N. 103E.                         69

=Kubaritake=, Japan. 43N. 142E.                               88

=Kubessa=, Turkey in Asia. 34N. 43E.                          47

=Kuchaman Road=, Rajputana. 27N. 75E.                         59

=Kuch Behar=, Bengal. 26N. 90E.                               61

=Kuching=, East Indies. 2N. 110E.                             74

=Kuchino-erabu-shima=, Japan. 30N. 130E.                      89

=Kuchino-shima=, Japan. 30N. 130E.                            89

=Kuchinotsu=, Japan. 33N. 130E.                               89

=Kudo-khuduk=, Inner Mongolia. 41N. 104E.                     82

=Kudri Mukh=, Madras. 13N. 75E.                               63

=Ku-fau=, China. 36N. 117E.                                   83

=Kuhak=, Persia. 27N. 62E.                                    45

=Ku-ho River=, China. 31N. 107E.                              84

=Kuiten, Mount=, China. 42N. 114E.                            83

=Kui-ting-shan Mt.=, China. 32N. 104E.                        84

=Kuji=, Japan. 40N. 142E.                                     88

=Kuju-san=, Japan. 33N. 131E.                                 89

=Ku-kan=, Siam. 14N. 104E.                                    71

=Ku-la-dan=, Burma. 21N. 93E.                                 67

=Ku-la-dan River=, Burma. 20N. 93E.                           67

=Kulna=, Bengal. 23N. 90E.                                    61

=Ku-lu-shan=, China. 41N. 114E.                               83

=Kum=, Persia. 35N. 51E.                                      45

=Kumai=, Borneo. 3S. 112E.                                    76

=Kumai Bay=, Borneo. 3S. 112E.                                76

=Kumalmer=, Rajputana. 25N. 74E.                              59

=Kumamoto=, Japan. 33N. 131E.                                 89

=Kumanogawa=, Japan. 34N. 136E.                               91

=Kumbakonam=, Madras. 11N. 79E.                               63

=Kume-shima=, Lu-Chu Is. 26N. 127E.                           89

=Kumisheh=, Persia. 32N. 52E.                                 45

=Kumple=, Madras. 13N. 75E.                                   63

=Kumpol=, Borneo. 3S. 110E.                                   76

=Kumpu-wapi=, Siam. 17N. 103E.                                70

=Kun=, China. 33N. 112E.                                      82

=Kundgol=, Bombay. 15N. 76E.                                  62

=Kunduz=, Afghanistan. 36N. 69E.                              45

=Kung-chang=, China. 35N. 105E.                               82

=Kungit Island=, East Indies. 4S. 116E.                       76

=Kun-kiang River=, Korea. 36N. 127E.                          90

=Kunlong=, Burma. 23N. 99E.                                   67

=Kun-lun-shan=, China. 37N. 121E.                             83

=Kunsan=, Korea. 36N. 127E.                                   90

=Kupang=, East Indies. 10S. 124E.                             75

=Ku-pei-kou=, China. 41N. 117E.                               83

=Kuram=, Afghanistan. 34N. 70E.                               58

=Kuram Ft.=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 34N. 70E.                   58

=Kuram Pass=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 33N. 71E.                  58

=Kuram R.=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 33N. 71E.                    58

=Kurd Dagh=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 37E.                        46

=Kurdistan=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 43E.                        47

=Kurdo=, Inner Mongolia. 42N. 104E.                           82

=Kure=, Japan. 34N. 133E.                                     91

=Kuren=, Persia. 31N. 49E.                                    47

=Kurhurbari=, Bengal. 24N. 86E.                               61

=Kurgan=, Siberia. 55N. 65E.                                  94

=Kuri River=, Rajputana. 26N. 75E.                            59

=Kuria Muria Is.=, Arabia. 18N. 56E.                          45

=Kurigram River=, Bengal. 26N. 90E.                           61

=Kurmegala=, Ceylon. 7N. 80E.                                 63

=Kurna=, Turkey in Asia. 31N.                                 47

=Kurohane=, Japan. 37N. 140E.                                 91

=Kuroshima=, Japan. 31N. 130E.                                89

=Kurtle Strait=, Siberia. 51N. 157E.                          95

=Kurume=, Japan. 33N. 131E.                                   89

=Kushiro=, Japan. 43N. 144E.                                  88

=Kushiro=, Japan. 43N. 145E.                                  88

=Kushiro, Lake=, Japan. 43N. 144E.                            88

=Kushk=, Afghanistan. 35N. 62E.                               45

=Kushkan=, Persia. 31N. 56E.                                  45

=Kushkizerd=, Persia. 31N. 52E.                               45

=Kusupchi Sands=, Inner Mongolia. 40N. 108E.                  82

=Kutaya=, Asia Minor. 39N. 50E.                               46

=Kutei River=, East Indies. 1N. 116E.                         74

=Ku-tsing=, China. 25N. 104E.                                 84

=Kuwana=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                   91

=Ku-wu=, China. 36N. 111E.                                    82

=Ku-yuen=, China. 36N. 106E.                                  82

=Kwa=, Burma. 18N. 94E.                                       67

=Kwa=, Indo-China. 21N. 102E.                                 70

=Kwala Banka=, Sumatra. 2N. 101E.                             69

=Kwalu River=, Sumatra. 3N. 100E.                             69

=Kwan=, China. 31N. 104E.                                     84

=Kwang=, China. 32N. 115E.                                    83

=Kwang-binh-dinh=, Indo-China. 18N. 107E.                     70

=Kwang-chau-wan B.=, China. 21N. 111E.                        84

=Kwang-hai=, China. 22N. 113E.                                85

=Kwang-hsin=, China. 28N. 118E.                               85

=Kwang-ju=, Korea. 35N. 127E.                                 90

=Kwang-kiang R.=, China. 26N. 115E.                           85

=Kwang-nam=, Indo-China. 16N. 108E.                           70

=Kwang-nan=, China. 24N. 105E.                                84

=Kwang-ngai=, Indo-China. 15N. 109E.                          70

=Kwang-ping=, China. 37N. 115E.                               83

=Kwang-si=, China. 24N. 109E.                                 84

=Kwang-Suong=, Indo-China. 20N. 106E.                         70

=Kwang-te=, China. 31N. 120E.                                 85

=Kwang-tsi=, China. 30N. 116E.                                85

=Kwang-tu=, Indo-China. 17N. 107E.                            70

=Kwang-tung=, China. 23N. 114E.                               85

=Kwang-tung Pen.=, China. 39N. 121E.                          83

=Kwang-yuen=, China. 32N. 106E.                               82

=Kwan-tien=, Manchuria. 41N. 125E.                            90

=Kwei=, China. 23N. 110E.                                     84

=Kwei=, China. 31N. 111E.                                     84

=Kwei-chau=, China. 27N. 107E.                                84

=Kwei-chau=, China. 31N. 110E.                                84

=Kwei-kiang River=, China. 24N. 111E.                         84

=Kwei-kwa-cheng=, China. 41N. 112E.                           82

=Kwei-lin=, China. 25N. 111E.                                 84

=Kwei-tung=, China. 26N. 114E.                                85

=Kwei-yang=, China. 26N. 107E.                                84

=Kwi=, Korea. 37N. 127E.                                      90

=Kwi-chu=, Indo-China. 19N. 105E.                             70

=Kyan-kin=, Burma. 18N. 95E.                                  67

=Kyauk-chaing-gale=, Burma. 17N. 95E.                         67

=Kyaukkyi=, Burma. 19N. 97E.                                  67

=Kyauk-pyu=, Burma. 19N. 94E.                                 67

=Kyaukse=, Burma. 22N. 96E.                                   67

=Kyauktaga=, Burma. 18N. 97E.                                 67

=Kyeng-ju=, Korea. 36N. 129E.                                 90

=Kyeng-San, North=, Korea. 36N. 128E.                         90

=Kyeng-San, South=, Korea. 35N. 128E.                         90

=Kyeng-seng=, Korea. 42N. 130E.                               90

=Kyithi Bansan=, Burma. 22N. 98E.                             67

=Kyondon=, Burma. 16N. 95E.                                   67


=Labot Mt.=, Philippine Is. 14N. 123E.                        77

=Labuan Batu=, Sumatra. 2N. 100E.                             69

=Labuan Bilik=, Sumatra. 2N. 100E.                            69

=Labuan Is.=, East Indies. 5N. 115E.                          74

=Lachish=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                               12

=Lacon Bight=, Malay Pen. 8N. 100E.                           71

=Ladak=, Kashmir. 34N. 78E.                                   58

=Ladik=, Asia Minor. 38N. 32E.                                46

=Ladno=, Rajputana. 28N. 74E.                                 59

=Ladrone Is.=, East Indies. 17N. 143E.                        75

=Lagree Peak=, Indo-China. 15N. 106E.                         70

=La-han=, Indo-China. 20N. 102E.                              70

=Lahijan=, Persia. 37N. 50E.                                  45

[*]=Lahore=, Punjab. 32N. 74E.                                58

=Lai-chau=, China. 37N. 120E.                                 83

=Lai-chou=, Indo-China. 22N. 103E.                            70

=Lai-feng=, China. 29N. 109E.                                 84

=Laish=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                                 12

=Lai-yang=, China. 37N. 121E.                                 83

=Lakam=, Kashmir. 34N. 78E.                                   58

=Lakhon=, Siam. 17N. 105E.                                    70

=Lakhone=, Siam. 18N. 100E.                                   70

=Lakhpat=, Bombay. 24N. 69E.                                  56

=Laki=, Sind. 26N. 68E.                                       59

=Laki River=, Baluchistan. 30N. 68E.                          58

=Lala Musa=, Punjab. 33N. 74E.                                58

=Lalang=, Sumatra. 1N. 102E.                                  69

=Lalin=, Manchuria. 45N. 127E.                                90

=La-lin-ho River=, Manchuria. 45N. 126E.                      90

=Lallatpur=, Central Provs. 25N. 78E.                         60

=Lambay Island=, Formosa. 22N. 120E.                          89

=Lamloam=, Turkey in Asia. 32N. 45E.                          47

=Lamotrek=, East Indies. 7N. 145E.                            75

=Lampun=, Siam. 19N. 99E.                                     70

=Lamu=, Burma. 19N. 94E.                                      67

=Lanao Lake, Mindanao=, Philippine Is. 8N. 124E.              77

=Lan-chau=, China. 36N. 104E.                                 82

=Lancon=, Malay Peninsula. 8N. 100E.                          71

=Lang Bian=, Indo-China. 12N. 108E.                           71

=Langdao=, Burma. 27N. 98E.                                   67

=Langlam Mts.=, Burma. 28N. 97E.                              67

=Lang-shan=, Inner Mongolia. 41N. 107E.                       82

[*]=Lang-son=, Indo-China. 22N. 107E.                         70

=Lang-suan=, Malay Pen. 10N. 99E.                             71

=Lang Xuyen=, Indo-China. 10N. 105E.                          71

=Lan-ha-ho=, China. 43N. 121E.                                83

=Lanjut=, Malay Peninsula. 2N. 103E.                          69

=Lan-shan=, China. 25N. 112E.                                 84

=Lan-tien=, China. 34N. 109E.                                 82

=Lan-tsi-kala=, China. 42N. 118E.                             83

=Lan-yi Island=, China. 25N. 120E.                            85

=Lao-chang-ho=, China. 38N. 117E.                             83

=Lao-ho=, China. 32N. 112E.                                   82

=Lao-kay=, Indo-China. 22N. 104E.                             70

=Laos=, Indo-China. 19N. 103E.                                70

=Laos, West=, Siam. 19N. 99E.                                 70

=Lao-shan Bay=, China. 36N. 121E.                             83

=La Perouse Strait=, Japan. 45N. 142E.                        88

=Lappa=, China. 22N. 114E.                                    85

=Lar=, Persia. 27N. 54E.                                      45

=Lara River=, Afghanistan. 32N. 67E.                          58

=Larantuca=, East Indies. 8S. 121E.                           74

=Larkhana=, Sind. 27N. 68E.                                   59

=Lash=, Afghanistan. 31N. 62E.                                45

=Lashio=, Burma. 23N. 98E.                                    67

=Las Islas B.=, Philippine Is. 9N. 123E.                      77

=Lauag=, Philippine Islands. 18N. 121E.                       77

=Laut=, East Indies. 4S. 116E.                                76

=Laut Island=, East Indies. 4S. 116E.                         74

=Laut Kechil Is.=, East Indies. 5S. 116E.                     76

=Laut Strait=, Borneo. 4S. 116E.                              76

=Lawn Mountain=, Java. 8S. 111E.                              76

=Lay, Cape=, Indo-China. 17N. 107E.                           70

=Lay-Thuy=, Indo-China. 17N. 107E.                            70

=Lazistan=, Asia Minor. 41N. 40E.                             47

[*]=Lebanon, Mounts.=, Palestine. 34N. 36E.                   12

=Lebeh River=, Malay Pen. 6N. 102E.                           68

=Lebonah=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                               12

=Lebos=, Asia Minor. 39N. 26E.                                46

=Ledo=, Assam. 27N. 96E.                                      67

=Ledung Bay=, Sumatra. 3N. 100E.                              69

=Legeh=, Malay Peninsula. 6N. 102E.                           68

=Le-gnya=, Burma. 11N. 99E.                                   71

=Legya=, Burma. 21N. 98E.                                     67

[*]=Leh=, Kashmir. 34N. 78E.                                  58

[*]=Leiah=, Punjab. 31N. 71E.                                 58

=Lei-chau=, China. 21N. 110E.                                 84

=Lei-chau Peninsula=, China. 21N. 110E.                       84

=Lei-po=, China. 28N. 104E.                                   84

=Lei-yang=, China. 26N. 113E.                                 85

=Lem Kolang Puk=, Malay Pen. 8N. 100E.                        71

=Lemnos=, Asia Minor. 40N. 25E.                               46

=Le-mro River=, Burma. 20N. 94E.                              67

=Le-myet-hua=, Burma. 18N. 95E.                               67

=Len=, Siam. 19N. 101E.                                       70

=Lena River=, Siberia. 73N. 128E.                             95

=Lenga=, Malay Peninsula. 2N. 103E.                           69

=Leontes River=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                         12

=Leo Porgial Mt.=, Kashmir. 32N. 78E.                         58

=Leros=, Asia Minor. 37N. 27E.                                46

=Leyte Island=, Philippine Is. 11N. 125E.                     77

=Lhasa=, Tibet. 31N. 91E.                                     61

=Li=, China. 34N. 105E.                                       82

=Lia-chau Bay=, China. 38N. 119E.                             83

=Liakov Island=, Siberia. 76N. 148E.                          95

=Liangan=, Philippine Islands. 9N. 126E.                      77

=Liant, Cape=, Siam. 13N. 101E.                               71

=Liao-ho=, China. 42N. 123E.                                  83

=Liao-tie-shan Chan=, China. 39N. 121E.                       83

=Liao-tung=, Manchuria. 40N. 123E.                            90

=Liao-yang=, Manchuria. 41N. 123E.                            90

=Lien=, China. 25N. 113E.                                     85

=Lien River=, China. 28N. 112E.                               84

=Lien-chau=, China. 21N. 109E.                                84

=Lien-hwa=, China. 26N. 114E.                                 85

=Lien-kiang=, China. 26N. 120E.                               85

=Lien-ping=, China. 24N. 114E.                                85

=Lien-shan=, China. 25N. 112E.                                84

=Ligor, Isthmus of=, Malay Pen. 8N. 100E.                     71

=Lilma=, Rajputana. 26N. 70E.                                 59

=Li-ma Island=, China. 22N. 114E.                             85

=Limri=, Bombay. 23N. 72E.                                    56

=Lin=, China. 38N. 111E.                                      82

=Linao B.=, Philippine Islands. 7E. 124E.                     77

=Linapacan=, Philippine Is. 11N. 120E.                        77

=Linawara=, Bombay. 23N. 74E.                                 56

=Lindsay=, East Indies. 20N. 140E.                            75

=Ling=, China. 26N. 114E.                                     85

=Ling=, China. 38N. 106E.                                     82

=Linga Island=, East Indies. 0. 105E.                         74

=Lingah=, Persia. 26N. 55E.                                   45

=Lingayen=, Philippine Is. 16N. 120E.                         77

=Lingayen B.=, Philippine Is. 16N. 120E.                      77

=Ling-kiang River=, China. 29N. 111E.                         84

=Ling-shui=, China. 19N. 110E.                                84

=Ling-shui Bay=, China. 19N. 110E.                            84

=Lingsugur=, Haidarabad. 16N. 77E.                            62

=Ling-tsing=, China. 37N. 116E.                               83

=Lin-kao=, China. 20N. 110E.                                  84

=Linkhera=, Bombay. 23N. 74E.                                 56

=Lin-kiang=, China. 28N. 115E.                                85

=Linping=, China. 31N. 120E.                                  85

=Lio-yang=, China. 33N. 106E.                                 82

=Li-ping=, China. 26N. 109E.                                  84

=Li-po=, China. 25N. 108E.                                    84

=Li-shin River=, China. 29N. 112E.                            84

=Liu-chau=, China. 24N. 109E.                                 84

=Liu-kiang River=, China. 25N. 109E.                          84

=Liu Kiu Is.=, East Indies. 25N. 126E.                        75

=Liu-ngan=, China. 32N. 116E.                                 85

=Liu-pa=, China. 34N. 107E.                                   82

=Liu-pin Pass=, China. 35N. 106E.                             82

=Liu-pin-shan=, China. 36N. 106E.                             82

=Llao-hsi=, China. 41N. 121E.                                 83

=Lo-cheng=, China. 25N. 109E.                                 84

=Lo-chwan=, China. 36N. 109E.                                 82

=Lodhran=, Punjab. 30N. 72E.                                  58

=Loey=, Siam. 18N. 102E.                                      70

=Lo-fu=, China. 25N. 107E.                                    84

=Lohaia=, Arabia. 16N. 43E.                                   44

=Lo-ho=, China. 35N. 109E.                                    82

=Lo-ho=, China. 35N. 112E.                                    82

=Loikaw=, Burma. 20N. 97E.                                    67

=Lo-jung=, China. 24N. 110E.                                  84

=Lo-ling=, China. 38N. 117E.                                  83

=Lo-ma-hu=, China. 34N. 118E.                                 83

=Lomblen Is.=, East Indies. 8S. 123E.                         75

=Lombok=, East Indies. 9S. 116E.                              74

=Lombok Strait=, East Indies. 9S. 116E.                       76

=Lo-min=, China. 21N. 110E.                                   84

=Londa=, Bombay. 16N. 74E.                                    57

=Londang=, Malay Peninsula. 2N. 103E.                         69

=Long Island=, East Indies. 5S. 147E.                         75

=Long Strait=, Siberia. 70N. 180E.                            95

=Lopatka, Cape=, Siberia. 51N. 157E.                          95

=Lopburi=, Siam. 15N. 101E.                                   71

=Lo-ping=, China. 25N. 104E.                                  84

=Lora River=, Afghanistan. 30N. 65E.                          45

=Loralai=, Punjab. 30N. 69E.                                  58

=Lord North Is.=, East Indies. 4N. 131E.                      75

=Los Jardines=, East Indies. 22N. 150E.                       75

=Loth=, Arabia. 20N. 41E.                                     44

=Lo-ting=, China. 23N. 111E.                                  84

=Lo-ting=, China. 39N. 119E.                                  83

=Lo-to-kan-tsze=, Manchuria. 44N. 129E.                       90

=Loughborough Is.=, Burma. 10N. 98E.                          71

=Lu=, China. 29N. 106E.                                       84

=Lu=, China. 36N. 113E.                                       83

=Luang Prabang=, Indo-China. 20N. 102E.                       70

=Lubang Is.=, Philippine Is. 14N. 120E.                       77

=Lubok Serampang=, Malay Pen. 3N. 102E.                       69

=Lubuk Batu=, Sumatra. 1N. 101E.                              69

=Lu-chau=, China. 32N. 117E.                                  85

=Luckimpur=, Assam. 27N. 94E.                                 67

[*]=Lucknow=, United Provs. 27N. 81E.                         60

=Ludhiana=, Punjab. 31N. 76E.                                 58

=Lu-feng=, China. 23N. 116E.                                  85

=Lughi=, Indo-China. 11N. 108E.                               71

=Lulfabad=, Persia. 37N. 59E.                                 45

=Lumut=, Malay Peninsula. 4N. 101E.                           68

=Lung-chau=, China. 22N. 107E.                                84

=Lung-ching-tsun=, Manchuria. 43N. 128E.                      90

=Lung-kiang River=, China. 24N. 109E.                         84

=Lung-kou=, China. 38N. 120E.                                 83

=Lung-men=, China. 36N. 110E.                                 82

=Lung-men=, China. 24N. 114E.                                 85

=Lung-men-kau=, China. 35N. 115E.                             83

=Lung-ngan=, China. 32N. 104E.                                82

=Lungu=, Malay Peninsula. 7N. 100E.                           68

=Lung-yen=, China. 25N. 117E.                                 85

=Luni River=, Rajputana. 25N. 71E.                            59

=Lunkaransar=, Rajputana. 29N. 74E.                           59

=Luristan=, Persia. 34N.                                      47

=Lushai Hills=, Burma. 24N. 93E.                              61

=Lu-shan Mountain=, China. 29N. 116E.                         85

=Lu-shi=, China. 34N. 111E.                                   82

=Lusi=, Java. 7S. 111E.                                       76

=Lut Desert=, Persia. 31N. 58E.                               45

=Lu-tien=, China. 27N. 104E.                                  84

=Luzon=, Philippine Islands. 16N. 121E.                       77

=Lwan=, China. 40N. 119E.                                     83

=Lwan-ho=, China. 41N. 117E.                                  83

=Lyallpur=, Punjab. 31N. 73E.                                 58

=Lydda=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                 13


=Macajalar B.=, Philippine Is. 9N. 125E.                      77

[*]=Macao=, China. 22N. 114E.                                 85

=Macassar=, East Indies. 5S. 119E.                            74

=Macassar, Str. of=, E. Indies. 0. 119E.                      74

=McCluer Inlet=, East Indies. 2S. 131E.                       75

=Mach=, Baluchistan. 30N. 67E.                                58

=Mackau Island=, Korea. 35N. 125E.                            90

=Macton Is.=, Philippine Is. 10N. 124E.                       77

=Madawatchi=, Ceylon. 9N. 80E.                                63

=Madeya=, Burma. 22N. 96E.                                    67

=Madgiri=, Mysore. 14N. 77E.                                  63

=Madhawipalem=, Madras. 16N. 82E.                             62

=Madhupur=, Bengal. 24N. 87E.                                 61

=Madinn=, Java. 8S. 112E.                                     76

[*]=Madras=, Madras. 13N. 80E.                                63

=Madura=, Madras. 10N. 78E.                                   63

=Madura=, Java. 7S. 113E.                                     76

=Madura Strait=, Java. 7S. 113E.                              76

=Magahan=, Rajputana. 29N. 74E.                               59

=Magdala=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                               13

=Maghribi=, Sind. 24N. 68E.                                   59

=Magwe=, Burma. 20N. 95E.                                     67

=Mahamonec=, Burma. 21N. 93E.                                 67

=Mahanadi River=, Bengal. 20N. 86E.                           60

=Mahanaim=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                              12

=Mahavilla River=, Ceylon. 8N. 81E.                           63

=Mahbubnagar=, Haidarabad. 17N. 78E.                          62

=Mahdi River=, Bombay. 23N. 73E.                              56

[*]=Mahe=, Madras. 12N. 76E.                                  63

=Mahim=, Bombay. 20N. 73E.                                    57

=Mahore=, Haidarabad. 20N. 78E.                               62

=Mahran=, Persia. 35N. 49E.                                   47

=Maia River=, Siberia. 58N. 136E.                             95

=Maiaco=, East Indies. 25N. 124E.                             75

=Mai-ko River=, Manchuria. 46N. 129E.                         90

=Maimana=, Afghanistan. 36N. 65E.                             45

=Maing-Kaing=, Burma. 22N. 98E.                               67

=Maingkat=, Burma. 23N. 98E.                                  67

=Maingkyeng=, Burma. 23N. 99E.                                67

=Maing-long=, Burma. 23N. 97E.                                67

=Maingma=, Burma. 23N. 98E.                                   67

=Maingnaung=, Burma. 22N. 98E.                                67

=Maingpan=, Burma. 20N. 99E.                                  67

=Maingpat=, Burma. 23N. 98E.                                  67

=Maingpon=, Burma. 21N. 98E.                                  67

=Maingpyin=, Burma. 21N. 97E.                                 67

=Maingsat=, Burma. 21N. 99E.                                  67

=Maingshu=, Burma. 22N. 99E.                                  67

=Mainpuri=, United Provs. 27N. 79E.                           60

=Maisana=, Bombay. 23N. 72E.                                  56

=Makallah=, Arabia. 15N. 49E.                                 44

=Makhlaf=, Arabia. 18N. 45E.                                  44

=Makhowal=, Punjab. 31N. 76E.                                 58

=Ma-kia-ho=, China. 38N. 118E.                                83

=Makkarinupuri=, Japan. 42N. 141E.                            88

=Makrai=, Central Provs. 22N. 78E.                            60

=Makri=, Asia Minor. 36N. 29E.                                46

=Maktal=, Haidarabad. 17N. 77E.                               62

=Maku=, Persia. 39N. 45E.                                     47

=Makum=, Assam. 28N. 96E.                                     67

=Malabar=, Java. 7S. 107E.                                    76

=Malabar Coast=, Madras. 12N. 75E.                            63

=Malacca=, Malay Peninsula. 2N. 102E.                         69

=Malacca Strait=, E. Indies. 3N. 100E.                        74

=Malakand=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 35N.72E.                     58

=Malakwal=, Punjab. 32N. 73E.                                 58

=Malalayor, Cape=, Borneo. 4S. 114E.                          76

=Malampaya B.= (=Palawan Is.=), Philippine Islands.
 11N. 119E.                                                   77

=Malang=, Java. 8S. 113E.                                     76

=Malanud Kot=, Punjab. 30N. 71E.                              58

[*]=Malatiyeh=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 38E.                     47

=Malay Pen.=, East Indies. 10N. 100E.                         74

=Mal Bazar=, Bengal. 27N. 89E.                                61

=Maldah=, Bengal. 25N. 88E.                                   61

=Male=, Burma. 23N. 96E.                                      67

=Maler Katla=, Punjab. 31N. 76E.                              58

=Malhou Is.=, Philippine Is. 11N. 124E.                       77

=Mali-Kha River=, Burma. 26N. 98E.                            67

=Malin=, Burma. 26N. 95E.                                     67

=Malkher=, Haidarabad. 17N. 77E.                              62

=Malki=, Madras. 13N. 75E.                                    63

=Mallia=, Bombay. 23N. 71E.                                   56

=Malligaum=, Bombay. 21N. 75E.                                56

=Malucca Passage=, E. Indies. 0. 126E.                        75

=Malwan=, Bombay. 16N. 73E.                                   57

=Mamures=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 39E.                          47

=Manaar=, Ceylon. 9N. 80E.                                    63

=Manaar, Gulf of=, Madras. 9N. 79E.                           63

=Manantaudi=, Madras. 12N. 76E.                               63

=Manasseh=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                              12

=Man-aung Island=, Burma. 19N. 94E.                           67

=Mancheri=, Rajputana. 27N. 77E.                              59

[*]=Mandalay=, Burma. 22N. 96E.                               67

=Mandan River=, Sumatra. 1N. 102E.                            69

=Mandarin Road=, Indo-China. 17N. 107E.                       70

=Mandarin's Cap.=, China. 21N. 113E.                          84

=Mandelika,= Java. 6S. 111E.                                  76

=Mandella=, Borneo. 3S. 116E.                                 76

=Mandlah=, Central Provs. 22N. 80E.                           60

=Mandvi=, Bombay. 23N. 69E.                                   56

=Mandwa=, Bombay. 22N. 70E.                                   56

[*]=Mangalore=, Madras. 13N. 75E.                             63

=Mangalpur=, Bombay. 21N. 70E.                                56

=Mangampet=, Haidarabad. 18N. 80E.                            62

=Manikpur=, N.W. Provinces. 25N. 82E.                         60

[*]=Manila=, Philippine Islands. 15N. 121E.                   77

=Manipur=, Assam. 25N. 94E.                                   67

=Manipur River=, Burma. 24N. 94E.                             67

[*]=Manissa=, Asia Minor. 39N. 27E.                           46

=Maniyachi=, Madras. 9N. 78E.                                 63

=Manjerra R.=, Haidarabad. 19N. 78E.                          62

=Mankera=, Punjab. 31N. 71E.                                  58

=Manmad=, Bombay. 20N. 74E.                                   56

=Mannagur=, Haidarabad. 18N. 81E.                             62

=Mannargudi=, Madras. 11N. 80E.                               63

=Mansak=, Burma. 23N. 99E.                                    67

=Mansaraur, Lake=, Thibet. 31N. 81E.                          60

=Mantalingajan Mt.=, Philippine Is. 8N. 118E.                 77

=Mantotottama=, Ceylon. 9N. 80E.                              63

=Manus Island=, 2S. 146E.                                     75

=Maon=, Palestine. 31N. 35E.                                  12

=Mao-shan=, Manchuria. 45N. 127E.                             90

=Maragah=, Persia. 38N. 46E.                                  47

=Marand=, Persia. 39N. 46E.                                   47

=Marash=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 37E.                           46

=Marat=, Rajputana. 27N. 75E.                                 59

=Mardan=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 34N. 72E.                      58

=Mardin=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 41E.                           47

=Mardodi=, Haidarabad. 18N. 79E.                              62

=Marella=, Madras. 15N. 80E.                                  62

=Mareshah=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                              12

=Margaum=, Bombay. 15N. 74E.                                  57

=Margelan=, Turkestan. 41N. 72E.                              45

=Mari=, Punjab. 33N. 72E.                                     58

=Mari River=, Sind. 28N. 69E.                                 59

=Mariani=, Assam. 27N. 94E.                                   67

=Marianne Is.=, East Indies. 17N. 143E.                       75

=Marianne Strait=, E. Indies. 8S. 139E.                       75

=Marikuppam=, Mysore. 13N. 78E.                               63

=Marimsk=, Siberia. 56N. 88E.                                 94

=Marinduque Is.=, Philippine Is. 13N. 122E.                   77

=Marmara, Sea of=, Asia Minor. 41N. 28E.                      46

=Marmarice=, Asia Minor. 37N. 28E.                            46

=Marri Country=, Baluchistan. 30N. 68E.                       58

=Marshall Is.=, East Indies. 22N. 150E.                       75

=Marsiwan=, Asia Minor. 41N. 35E.                             46

=Martaban=, Burma. 17N. 98E.                                  67

=Martaban, Gulf of=, Burma. 16N. 97E.                         67

=Martapura=, Borneo. 4S. 115E.                                76

=Marudha=, Turkestan. 36N. 62E.                               45

=Marugame=, Japan. 34N. 134E.                                 91

=Marunsk=, Siberia. 52N. 140E.                                95

=Marwar Junc.=, Rajputana. 26N. 74E.                          59

=Masada=, Palestine. 31N. 35E.                                13

=Masampo=, Korea. 35N. 128E.                                  90

=Masbate Is.=, Philippine Is. 12N. 124E.                      77

=Mascat=, Arabia. 24N. 59E.                                   45

=Mashake=, Japan. 43N. 142E.                                  88

=Mashaki=, Afghanistan. 33N. 68E.                             58

=Mastung=, Baluchistan. 30N. 67E.                             58

[*]=Masulipatam=, Madras. 16N. 81E.                           62

=Mataram=, Lombok. 8S. 116E.                                  76

=Matella=, Ceylon. 8N. 81E.                                   63

=Ma-tien=, China. 36N. 108E.                                  82

=Ma-tsu=, China. 26N. 120E.                                   85

=Matsumoto=, Japan. 36N. 138E.                                91

=Matsusaka=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                91

=Matsushiro=, Japan. 37N. 138E.                               91

=Matsuyama=, Japan. 34N. 133E.                                91

[*]=Matsuye=, Japan. 36N. 133E.                               91

=Mattancheri=, Madras. 10N. 76E.                              63

=Matun=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 33N. 70E.                       58

=Matura=, Ceylon. 6N. 81E.                                    63

=Matutum Mt.=, Philippine Is. 6N. 125E.                       77

=Matuva=, Borneo. 3S. 111E.                                   76

=Mau=, China. 32N. 104E.                                      84

=Maubin=, Burma. 17N. 96E.                                    67

=Maukadaw=, Burma. 23N. 95E.                                  67

=Maukme=, Burma. 20N. 98E.                                    67

=Maulia=, Rajputana. 27N. 77E.                                59

=Maulmein=, Burma. 16N. 98E.                                  67

=Maung-daw=, Burma. 21N. 92E.                                 67

=Maung Mai=, Siam. 19N. 99E.                                  70

=Maung Nan=, Siam. 19N. 101E.                                 70

=Maung Prai=, Siam. 18N. 100E.                                70

=Maurits Reef, P.=, E. Indies. 6S. 116E.                      76

=Mawlu=, Burma. 24N. 96E.                                     67

=Mayait L.=, Philippine Is. 10N. 125E.                        77

=Mayavaram=, Madras. 11N. 80E.                                63

=Mayehashi=, Japan. 36N. 139E.                                91

=Mayhlaung=, Siam. 13N. 100E.                                 71

=Mayo Bay=, Philippine Is. 7N. 126E.                          77

=Mayon=, Philippine Islands. 13N. 127E.                       77

=Mayu River=, Burma. 20N. 93E.                                67

=Mazanderan=, Persia. 36N. 52E.                               45

=Meakantake Island=, Japan. 43N. 144E.                        88

=Mears=, East Indies. 24N. 147E.                              75

[*]=Mecca=, Arabia. 21N. 40E.                                 44

=Me-che=, Burma. 19N. 98E.                                    67

=Medak=, Haidarabad. 18N. 78E.                                62

=Medebah=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                               12

[*]=Medina=, Arabia. 25N. 40E.                                44

[*]=Meerut=, United Provs. 29N. 78E.                          59

=Meester Cornelis=, Java. 6S. 107E.                           76

=Meezan=, Burma. 17N. 98E.                                    67

[*]=Megiddo=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                            12

=Megna River=, Bengal. 23N. 90E.                              61

=Mehkar=, Berar. 20N. 76E.                                    60

=Mei=, China. 30N. 104E.                                      84

=Mei=, China. 34N. 108E.                                      82

=Mei-kiang River=, China. 24N. 116E.                          85

=Meiktila=, Burma. 21N. 96E.                                  67

=Mei-ling Mountain=, China. 25N. 114E.                        85

=Me Ing=, Siam. 20N. 100E.                                    70

=Meis=, Asia Minor. 36N. 29E.                                 46

=Mei-tan=, China. 28N. 108E.                                  84

=Me Khoke=, Siam. 20N. 100E.                                  70

=Me-klong=, Siam. 13N. 100E.                                  71

=Me-kong River=, Indo-China. 10N. 106E.                       70

=Mekran=, Baluchistan. 25N. 62E.                              45

=Melasgerd=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 42E.                        47

=Melkapur=, Berar. 21N. 76E.                                  56

=Melsir=, Rajputana. 29N. 74E.                                59

=Me Lu=, Siam. 20N. 100E.                                     70

=Melu Prey=, Indo-China. 14N. 105E.                           71

=Menado=, East Indies. 2N. 125E.                              75

=Menam=, Siam. 14N. 101E.                                     71

=Menama=, Arabia. 26N. 51E.                                   45

=Menam-kway-nauna=, Siam. 13N. 100E.                          71

=Me Nam Wang=, Siam. 17N. 99E.                                70

=Menam Yome=, Siam. 16N. 100E.                                70

=Menara, River=, Malay Pen. 6N. 102E.                         68

=Mendawe=, Borneo. 3S. 113E.                                  76

[*]=Menderes River=, Asia Minor. 38N. 28E.                    46

=Meng-cheng=, China. 33N. 117E.                               83

=Meng-yin=, China. 36N. 118E.                                 83

=Mentawei Is.=, East Indies. 2S. 98E.                         74

=Menyo=, Burma. 18N. 96E.                                     67

=Me Ping=, Siam. 16N. 100E.                                   70

=Merapi Mount=, Java. 8S. 111E.                               76

=Merbau=, Malay Peninsula. 6N. 100E.                          68

=Mergui=, Burma. 12N. 98E.                                    71

=Mergui Archipelago.= 12N. 98E.                               71

=Merom, Waters of=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                      12

=Mersina=, Asia Minor. 37N. 35E.                              46

[*]=Merta=, Rajputana. 27N. 74E.                              59

=Merta Road=, Rajputana. 27N. 74E.                            59

=Meru Bay=, Java. 9S. 114E.                                   76

[*]=Merv=, Turkestan. 38N. 62E.                               45

=Merwara=, Rajputana. 26N. 74E.                               59

=Mesana=, Bombay. 24N. 72E.                                   56

=Mesandum, Cape=, Arabia. 26N. 56E.                           45

[*]=Meshed=, Persia. 36N. 59E.                                45

=Meskineh=, Turkey in Asia. 36N. 38E.                         47

=Mesopotamia=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 40E.                      47

=Mettapolliam=, Madras, 11N. 77E.                             63

=Meyhere=, Central India. 24N. 81E.                           60

=Miandoab=, Persia. 37N. 46E.                                 47

=Miani=, Bombay. 22N. 69E.                                    56

=Miankalai=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 35N. 72E.                   58

=Mianwali=, Punjab. 33N. 71E.                                 58

=Miao-tao Island=, China. 38N. 121E.                          83

=Michailovsk=, Turkestan. 40N. 54E.                           45

[*]=Michmash=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                           13

=Middle Island=, Malay Pen. 9N. 98E.                          71

=Midnapore=, Bengal. 22N. 88E.                                61

=Midzusawa=, Japan. 39N. 141E.                                88

=Mien=, China. 31N. 105E.                                     84

=Mien-yang=, China. 30N. 113E.                                85

=Mihara=, Japan. 34N. 133E.                                   91

=Miharu=, Japan. 37N. 141E.                                   91

=Mikawa=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                   91

=Mikuni Toge=, Japan. 37N. 139E.                              91

=Mikura Shima=, Japan. 34N. 140E.                             91

=Milasa=, Asia Minor. 37N. 28E.                               46

=Mimasaka=, Japan. 35N. 134E.                                 91

=Min=, China. 34N. 104E.                                      82

=Minahassa=, East Indies. 1N. 124E.                           75

=Minato=, Japan. 36N. 141E.                                   91

=Minato=, Japan. 40N. 142E.                                   88

=Minbu=, Burma. 20N. 95E.                                     67

=Mindanao=, East Indies. 8N. 124E.                            75

=Mindoro Is.=, Philippine Is. 13N. 121E.                      77

=Mindoro Str.=, Philippine Is. 13N. 121E.                     77

=Mingin=, Burma. 23N. 94E.                                    67

=Minhla=, Burma. 18N. 96E.                                    67

=Min-ho River=, China. 29N. 105E.                             84

=Min-kiang River=, China. 26N. 119E.                          85

=Mino=, Japan. 36N. 137E.                                     91

=Min-tsing=, China. 26N. 119E.                                85

=Miraj=, Bombay. 17N. 75E.                                    57

=Miran Shah=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 33N. 70E.                  58

=Miri=, Baluchistan. 26N. 63E.                                45

=Mirkhan Tana=, Sind. 26N. 68E.                               59

=Mirpur=, Kashmir. 33N. 74E.                                  58

=Mirpur=, Sind. 25N. 68E.                                     59

=Mirpur=, Sind. 25N. 69E.                                     59

=Mirs Bay=, China. 22N. 114E.                                 85

=Mirzapur=, N.W. Provinces. 25N. 82E.                         60

=Misol Island=, East Indies. 2S. 130E.                        75

=Misumi=, Japan. 33N. 131E.                                   89

=Mithan Kot=, Punjab. 29N. 70E.                               59

=Mito=, Japan. 36N. 141E.                                     91

=Mitsuna-shima=, Lu-Chu Is. 25N. 124E.                        89

=Mitta=, Punjab. 32N. 72E.                                    58

[*]=Mityleni=, Asia Minor. 39N. 27E.                          46

=Miyagam=, Bombay. 22N. 73E.                                  56

=Miyaka Shima=, Japan. 34N. 140E.                             91

=Miyako=, Japan. 40N. 142E.                                   88

=Miyako Is.=, Lu-Chu Island. 24N. 126E.                       89

=Miyakoshima=, Lu-Chu Is. 25N. 125E.                          89

=Miyazaki=, Japan. 32N. 131E.                                 89

=Miyoshi=, Japan. 35N. 133E.                                  91

=Mi-yun=, China. 40N. 117E.                                   83

=Moa=, East Indies. 8S. 128E.                                 75

=Mobarakpur=, Punjab. 30N. 73E.                               58

=Mocha=, Arabia. 13N. 43E.                                    44

=Modeste Island.= 35N. 125E.                                  90

=Mogami River=, Japan. 39N. 140E.                             88

=Mogaung=, Burma. 25N. 97E.                                   67

=Moghal Sarai=, United Provs. 25N. 83E.                       60

=Mogok=, Burma. 23N. 96E.                                     67

=Mohammerah=, Persia. 30N. 48E.                               47

=Mohangarh=, Rajputana. 27N. 71E.                             59

=Moi=, Indo-China. 19N. 102E.                                 70

=Moirang=, Assam. 24N. 94E.                                   67

=Mois=, Indo-China. 15N. 108E.                                70

=Mojarh=, Punjab. 29N. 72E.                                   59

=Moji=, Japan. 34N. 131E.                                     89

=Mojma=, Arabia. 26N. 46E.                                    44

=Molangur=, Haidarabad. 18N. 79E.                             62

=Mollacallamuru=, Mysore. 15N. 77E.                           62

=Molpo=, Korea. 35N. 126E.                                    90

=Molsi=, Punjab. 30N. 72E.                                    58

=Moluccas=, East Indies. 3S. 127E.                            75

=Mombetsu=, Japan. 44N. 143E.                                 88

=Momeit=, Burma. 23N. 97E.                                    67

=Mominabad=, Haidarabad. 19N. 76E.                            62

=Monda=, Rajputana. 26N. 74E.                                 59

=Mone=, Burma. 20N. 98E.                                      67

=Mong-cy=, Indo-China. 21N. 108E.                             70

[*]=Monghyr=, Bengal. 25N. 86E.                               61

=Monhyin=, Burma. 25N. 97E.                                   67

=Montgomery=, Punjab. 31N. 73E.                               58

=Montgomery Is.=, Lu-Chu Is. 27N. 128E.                       89

=Monywa=, Burma. 22N. 95E.                                    67

=Mopani=, Central Provs. 23N. 79E.                            60

=Moradabad=, United Provs. 29N. 79E.                          60

=Morbat=, Arabia. 17N. 55E.                                   45

=Moresly Port=, East Indies. 10S. 146E.                       75

=Moresses Island=, E. Indies. 4S. 116E.                       76

=Mori=, Japan. 42N. 141E.                                     88

=Morioka=, Japan. 40N. 141E.                                  88

=Mormugao=, Bombay. 15N. 74E.                                 57

=Morne, Cape=, China. 19N. 109E.                              84

=Mororan=, Japan. 42N. 141E.                                  88

=Morotai Island.= 3N. 129E.                                   75

=Morvi=, Bombay. 23N. 71E.                                    56

=Moscos Island=, Burma. 14N. 97E.                             71

=Moseirah Island=, Arabia. 20N. 59E.                          45

[*]=Mosul=, Turkey in Asia. 36N. 43E.                         47

=Mo-tien-ling=, Manchuria. 41N. 124E.                         90

=Motihara=, Bengal. 27N. 85E.                                 60

=Motoyoshi=, Japan. 39N. 142E.                                88

=Moyoro=, Japan. 42N. 143E.                                   88

=Mozuffurabad=, Kashmir. 34N. 73E.                            58

=Muakhom=, Burma. 26N. 97E.                                   67

=Mualitch=, Asia Minor. 40N. 28E.                             46

=Muang Ang Tong=, Siam. 14N. 101E.                            71

=Muang Fang=, Siam. 20N. 99E.                                 70

=Muanglem=, Burma. 22N. 99E.                                  67

=Muang Lim=, Burma. 21N. 100E.                                67

=Muang Lom=, Siam. 17N. 101E.                                 70

=Muang Ta=, Burma. 20N. 99E.                                  67

=Muang Yong=, Burma. 21N. 100E.                               67

=Muar River=, Malay Pen. 2N. 103E.                            69

=Mubarriz=, Arabia. 26N. 50E.                                 44

=Muda River=, Malay Pen. 6N. 100E.                            68

=Mudamatt River=, Bengal. 22N. 90E.                           61

=Mudera=, Haidarabad. 19N. 78E.                               62

=Mudgul=, Haidarabad. 16N. 76E.                               62

=Muding=, Asia Minor. 41N. 29E.                               46

=Mudki=, Punjab. 31N. 75E.                                    58

=Mugla=, Asia Minor. 37N. 28E.                                46

=Mu-ju=, Korea. 36N. 128E.                                    90

[*]=Mukden=, Manchuria. 42N. 124E.                            90

=Mulapumok=, Indo-China. 14N. 107E.                           71

=Mulda=, Central Provs. 23N. 82E.                             60

[*]=Multan=, Punjab. 30N. 71E.                                58

=Munapaud=, Madras. 8N. 78E.                                  63

=Mundra=, Bombay. 23N. 70E.                                   56

=Mungulvera=, Bombay. 18N. 75E.                               57

=Muntok=, East Indies. 2S. 105E.                              74

=Muradkot=, Punjab. 28N. 71E.                                 59

=Murad su=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 40E.                         47

=Murakami=, Japan. 38N. 139E.                                 88

=Muren=, Manchuria. 44N. 130E.                                90

=Murghab=, Persia. 30N. 53E.                                  45

=Murghab River=, Turkestan. 36N. 62E.                         45

=Muria Mountain=, Java. 6S. 111E.                             76

=Muroto Cape=, Japan. 33N. 134E.                              91

=Murri=, Punjab. 34N. 73E.                                    58

[*]=Murshidabad=, Bengal. 24N. 88E.                           61

=Musa Khel=, Baluchistan. 31N. 70E.                           58

=Mu-sang=, Korea. 42N. 129E.                                  90

=Musashi=, Japan. 36N. 139E.                                  91

[*]=Mush=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 42E.                          47

=Musi River=, Haidarabad. 17N. 80E.                           62

=Mussuri=, United Provs. 30N. 78E.                            60

=Mutan-kiang R.=, Manchuria. 46N. 129E.                       90

=Mutapet=, Madras. 10N. 80E.                                  63

=Mutri=, Baluchistan. 29N. 68E.                               59

=Muttra=, Arabia. 24N. 59E.                                   45

[*]=Muttra=, United Provs. 27N. 78E.                          59

=Muzaffargarh=, Punjab. 30N. 71E.                             58

=Muzaffarnaggar=, United Provs. 29N. 78E.                     60

=Muzaffarpur=, Bengal. 26N. 85E.                              60

=Myadaung=, Burma. 24N. 96E.                                  67

=Myanaung=, Burma. 18N. 95E.                                  67

=Myaunguya=, Burma. 17N. 95E.                                 67

=Myawaddy=, Burma. 17N. 98E.                                  67

=Myedu=, Burma. 23N. 95E.                                     67

=Myeng=, Burma. 17N. 98E.                                     67

=Myingyan=, Burma. 22N. 95E.                                  67

=Myitkyina=, Burma. 25N. 98E.                                 67

=Myo-haung=, Burma. 21N. 93E.                                 67

=Myotha=, Burma. 22N. 96E.                                    67

=Myra=, Asia Minor. 36N. 30E.                                 46

=Mysore=, Mysore. 12N. 77E.                                   63

=Mytho=, Indo-China. 10N. 106E.                               71


=Na=, Siam. 17N. 99E.                                         70

=Naashahra=, Punjab. 28N. 70E.                                59

=Na-Cham=, China. 22N. 107E.                                  84

=Nada=, Japan. 34N. 130E.                                     89

=Nadaun=, Punjab. 32N. 76E.                                   58

=Nafa=, Lu-Chu Islands. 26N. 128E.                            89

=Naga=, Philippine Islands. 14N. 124E.                        77

=Naga Hills=, Assam. 26N. 95E.                                67

=Nagano=, Japan. 37N. 138E.                                   91

=Nagaoka=, Japan. 37N. 139E.                                  91

[*]=Nagar=, Mysore. 14N. 75E.                                 63

=Nagar Karnul=, Haidarabad. 16N. 78E.                         62

=Nagar Parkar=, Sind. 24N. 71E.                               59

[*]=Nagasaki=, Japan. 33N. 130E.                              89

=Naga-shima=, Japan. 32N. 130E.                               89

=Nagathana=, Bombay. 19N. 73E.                                57

=Nagawalli, River=, Madras. 18N. 84E.                         62

=Nagercoil=, Madras. 8N. 77E.                                 63

=Nagor=, Rajputana. 27N. 74E.                                 59

=Nagoya=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                   91

=Nagpur=, Bengal. 23N. 86E.                                   61

[*]=Nagpur=, Central Provinces. 21N. 79E.                     60

[*]=Nain=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                               12

=Nain River=, Sind. 28N. 69E.                                 59

=Naini Tal=, United Provs. 29N. 79E.                          60

=Naipalgang=, United Provs. 28N. 81E.                         60

=Nakano-shima=, Japan. 30N. 130E.                             89

=Nakatorishima=, Japan. 33N. 129E.                            89

=Nakatsu=, Japan. 34N. 131E.                                  89

=Nakatsugawa=, Japan. 35N. 138E.                              91

=Naki Shima=, Japan. 36N. 133E.                               91

=Nakon Sawan=, Siam. 16N. 100E.                               70

=Naldurg=, Haidarabad. 18N. 76E.                              62

=Na-le=, Indo-China. 19N. 102E.                               70

=Nalgonda=, Haidarabad. 17N. 79E.                             62

=Nalhati=, Bengal. 24N. 88E.                                  61

=Nambu-shoto Is.=, Lu-Chu Is. 24N. 126E.                      89

=Nam-dinh=, Indo-China. 20N. 106E.                            70

=Namine=, Japan. 35N. 133E.                                   91

=Namiteruma Is.=, Lu-Chu Is. 24N. 124E.                       89

=Namkal Droog=, Madras. 11N. 78E.                             63

=Namka River=, Burma. 22N. 97E.                               67

=Nam Kho River=, Burma. 22N. 99E.                             67

=Nam Lui=, Burma. 21N. 101E.                                  67

=Nam-maw River=, Burma. 24N. 96E.                             67

=Namonuito=, East Indies. 9N. 150E.                           75

=Nam Pat=, Siam. 17N. 100E.                                   70

=Nam Si=, Siam. 15N. 105E.                                    70

=Nana=, Rajputana. 25N. 73E.                                  59

=Nanao=, Japan. 37N. 137E.                                    91

=Nanatsu Shima=, Japan. 37N. 137E.                            91

=Nan-chang=, China. 28N. 116E.                                85

=Nan-chwan=, China. 29N. 107E.                                84

=Nandadebi=, United Provs. 30N. 80E.                          60

=Nandair=, Haidarabad. 19N. 77E.                              62

=Nanderbar=, Bombay. 21N. 74E.                                56

=Nandgaon=, Central Provs. 21N. 81E.                          60

[*]=Nandidrug=, Mysore. 13N. 78E.                             63

=Naneh=, Bombay. 19N. 74E.                                    57

=Nan-feng=, China. 27N. 116E.                                 85

=Nangamessi=, East Indies. 10S. 120E.                         74

=Nan-hai-do=, Korea. 35N. 128E.                               90

=Nan-hsung=, China. 25N. 114E.                                85

=Nan-hu=, Manchuria. 44N. 129E.                               90

=Nanjangad=, Mysore. 12N. 77E.                                63

=Nankaido=, Japan. 34N. 134E.                                 91

=Nan-kang=, China. 29N. 116E.                                 85

=Nan-kau Mts.=, China. 40N. 115E.                             83

=Nan-ki=, China. 29N. 105E.                                   84

=Nan-kiang=, China. 32N. 107E.                                82

=Nan-ki Island=, China. 27N. 121E.                            85

[*]=Nan-king=, China. 32N. 119E.                              85

=Nan-kwan=, China. 27N. 120E.                                 85

=Nan-ling=, China. 25N. 112E.                                 84

=Nan-ling=, China. 31N. 118E.                                 85

=Nan Mun=, Siam. 15N. 104E.                                   70

=Nan-ngan=, China. 26N. 114E.                                 85

=Nan-ngan Island=, China. 23N. 117E.                          85

=Nan-ning=, China. 23N. 108E.                                 84

=Nan-shan=, China. 22N. 110E.                                 84

=Nan-yang=, China. 33N. 113E.                                 82

=Naoyetsu=, Japan. 37N. 138E.                                 91

=Napa=, East Indies. 26N. 128E.                               75

=Naphtali=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                              12

=Nara=, Japan. 35N. 136E.                                     91

=Narabet=, Bombay. 24N. 71E.                                  56

=Narbada River=, Bombay. 22N. 73E.                            56

=Narglah=, Rajputana. 25N. 77E.                               59

=Nariad=, Bombay. 23N. 73E.                                   56

[*]=Narnaul=, Punjab. 28N. 76E.                               59

=Narra River=, Sind. 27N. 69E.                                59

=Narrulah=, Central Provs. 20N. 83E.                          60

=Narsinghgarh=, Central India. 24N. 77E.                      60

=Narsingpur=, Central Provs. 23N. 79E.                        60

=Naryn=, Asiatic Russia. 42N. 74E.                            94

=Nase=, Lu-Chu Islands. 20N. 129E.                            89

=Nasera=, Bombay. 17N. 75E.                                   57

[*]=Nasik=, Bombay. 20N. 74E.                                 57

=Nasirabad=, Bengal. 25N. 90E.                                61

=Nasirabad=, Bombay. 21N. 76E.                                56

=Nasirabad=, Rajputana. 26N. 75E.                             59

=Nassau Is.=, East Indies. 3S. 100E.                          74

=Natal=, East Indies, 1N. 99E.                                74

=Natmouk=, Burma. 20N. 95E.                                   67

=Natu=, Malay Peninsula. 7N. 100E.                            68

=Natuna Island=, East Indies. 4N. 108E.                       74

=Naupada=, Madras. 19N. 84E.                                  62

=Nausari=, Sind. 27N. 68E.                                    59

=Navalupitya=, Ceylon. 7N. 80E.                               63

=Navanagar=, Bombay. 23N. 70E.                                56

=Nawagam=, Madras. 20N. 84E.                                  62

=Naya Dumka=, Bengal. 24N. 87E.                               61

=Nayor=, Japan. 43N. 142E.                                    88

[*]=Nazareth=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                           13

=Nebo, Mount=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                           12

=Nefud=, Arabia. 25N. 43E.                                    44

=Nefud= or =Dahna=, Arabia. 25N. 48E.                         44

=Nefud Desert=, Arabia. 29N. 42E.                             44

[*]=Negapatam=, Madras, 11N. 80E.                             63

=Negara=, Bali. 8S. 115E.                                     76

=Negombo=, Ceylon. 7N. 80E.                                   63

=Negrais, Cape=, Burma. 16N. 94E.                             67

=Negros=, Philippine Islands, 10N. 123E.                      77

=Neh=, Persia. 31N. 60E.                                      45

[*]=Nehavend=, Persia. 34N. 48E.                              47

=Nehbandan Mts.=, Persia. 30N. 60E.                           45

=Nehbendan=, Persia. 32N. 58E.                                45

=Nejd=, Arabia. 26N. 45E.                                     44

=Nejef=, Turkey in Asia. 32N. 44E.                            47

=Nejran Jauf=, Arabia. 18N. 46E.                              44

[*]=Nellore=, Madras. 14N. 80E.                               62

[*]=Nertchinsk=, Siberia. 52N. 117E.                          95

=Netrawati River=, Madras. 13N. 75E.                          63

=Neumuro=, Japan. 43N. 145E.                                  88

=Neun=, Indo-China. 19N. 104E.                                70

=Neung-ju=, Korea. 35N. 126E.                                 90

=Nevshehr=, Asia Minor. 38N. 34E.                             46

=New Chaman=, Punjab. 31N. 67E.                               58

=New Guinea=, East Indies. 5S. 141E.                          75

=New Pind Sultani=, Punjab. 34N. 72E.                         58

=New Pommern=, East Indies. 6S. 149E.                         75

=New Siberia Is.=, Siberia. 76N. 148E.                        95

=Nezib=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                 12

=Ngai=, Siam. 20N. 99E.                                       70

=Ngan=, China. 39N. 116E.                                     83

=Ngan-hwa=, China. 28N. 112E.                                 84

=Ngan-hwei=, China. 31N. 117E.                                85

=Ngan-hwei=, China. 32N. 118E.                                83

=Ngan-ki=, China. 25N. 118E.                                  85

=Ngan-king=, China. 31N. 117E.                                85

=Ngan-lu=, China. 31N. 113E.                                  85

=Ngan-nan=, China. 26N. 105E.                                 84

=Ngan-shun=, China. 26N. 106E.                                84

=Ngan-ting=, China. 36N. 104E.                                82

=Ngan-ting=, China. 37N. 109E.                                82

=Ngan-tung=, China. 34N. 119E.                                83

=Ngan-yo=, China. 30N. 105E.                                  84

=Nga-pu-taw=, Burma. 17N. 95E.                                67

=Ngen-ping=, China. 22N. 112E.                                84

=Ngoi=, Indo-China. 21N. 103E.                                70

=Ngoli=, East Indies. 9N. 137E.                               75

=Ngo-shan=, China. 36N. 111E.                                 82

=Nha-trang=, Indo-China. 12N. 109E.                           71

=Nho-Lam=, Indo-China. 22N. 107E.                             70

=Nhuong Har.=, Indo-China. 18N. 106E.                         70

=Nias Island=, East Indies, 1N. 97E.                          74

=Nigde=, Asia Minor. 38N. 35E.                                46

=Nightingale Is.=, Indo-China. 20N. 108E.                     70

=Niigata=, Japan. 38N. 139E.                                  91

=Niitakayama=, Formosa. 23N. 121E.                            89

=Nijni Kamtchatsk=, Siberia. 56N. 164E.                       95

=Nijni Kolimsk=, Siberia. 68N. 160E.                          95

=Nijni Udinsk=, Siberia. 55N. 99E.                            94

[*]=Nikaria=, Asia Minor. 38N. 26E.                           46

=Nikkomachi=, Japan. 37N. 139E.                               91

=Nikolaevsk=, Siberia. 54N. 141E.                             95

=Niksar=, Asia Minor. 41N. 37E.                               46

=Nilgiri Hills=, Madras, 11N. 77E.                            63

=Nimach=, Rajputana. 25N. 75E.                                59

=Nimrud D.=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 42E.                        47

=Nin-binh=, Indo-China. 20N. 106E.                            70

[*]=Nineveh=, Turkey in Asia. 36N. 43E.                       47

=Ning=, China. 36N. 108E.                                     82

=Ning-ho=, China. 39N. 118E.                                  83

=Ning-hsia=, China. 38N. 106E.                                82

=Ning-hwa=, China. 26N. 117E.                                 85

=Ning-kiang=, China. 33N. 106E.                               82

=Ning-kwo=, China. 31N. 119E.                                 85

[*]=Ning-po=, China. 30N. 121E.                               85

=Ning-shen=, China. 33N. 109E.                                82

=Ning-te=, China. 27N. 119E.                                  85

=Ning-tu=, China. 26N. 116E.                                  85

=Ninguta=, Manchuria. 44N. 129E.                              90

=Ning-wu=, China. 39N. 112E.                                  82

=Ning-yuen=, China. 41N. 121E.                                83

=Ninh-hoa=, Indo-China. 13N. 109E.                            71

=Ninh Thuan=, Indo-China. 11N. 109E.                          71

=Nipani=, Bombay. 16N. 74E.                                   57

=Nira River=, Bombay. 18N. 74E.                               57

=Nirayama=, Japan. 35N. 139E.                                 91

=Niris Lake=, Persia. 29N. 54E.                               45

=Nirmal=, Haidarabad. 19N. 78E.                               62

[*]=Nishapur=, Persia. 36N. 59E.                              45

=Nishikata=, Japan. 32N. 130E.                                89

=Nishio=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                   91

=Nishi Shima=, Japan. 36N. 133E.                              91

[*]=Nisibin=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 41E.                       47

=Nitaka Mountains=, Formosa. 24N. 121E.                       89

=Nitchbo=, Rajputana. 28N. 75E.                               59

=Niu-chwang=, Manchuria. 41N. 122E.                           90

=Nizamabad=, Haidarabad. 19N. 78E.                            62

=Nizampatnam=, Madras. 16N. 81E.                              62

=Nmai Kha=, Burma. 27N. 99E.                                  67

=Noagarh=, Central Provinces. 20N. 82E.                       60

=Nobeoka=, Japan. 33N. 132E.                                  89

=Nong-han=, Siam. 17N. 103E.                                  70

=Nong-khai=, Siam. 18N. 103E.                                 70

=Nong-Son=, Indo-China. 16N. 108E.                            70

=Nordwick, Gulf of=, Siberia. 74N. 112E.                      94

=Norot=, China. 43N. 120E.                                    83

=North, Cape=, Siberia. 69N. 180E.                            95

=North-East Cape=, Siberia. 77N. 102E.                        94

=North-East Point=, Malay Pen. 9N. 100E.                      71

=Nor-to Mountains=, China. 42N. 116E.                         83

=Nosari=, Bombay. 21N. 73E.                                   56

=Noshiro=, Japan. 40N. 140E.                                  88

=Noto Shima=, Japan. 37N. 137E.                               91

=Nottam=, East Indies. 2S. 132E.                              75

=Novgorod=, Siberia. 43N. 131E.                               95

=Novgorodski=, Manchuria. 43N. 130E.                          90

=Nowgong=, Assam. 26N. 93E.                                   67

=Nowgong=, Central India. 25N. 80E.                           60

=Noycund=, Madras, 10N. 77E.                                  63

=Nsentaru=, Burma. 26N. 98E.                                  67

=Nubra=, Kashmir. 35N. 78E.                                   58

=Nubra River=, Kashmir. 34N. 78E.                             58

=Nudun=, Inner Mongolia. 41N. 105E.                           82

=Nu-hsi River=, China. 27N. 118E.                             85

=Numazu=, Japan. 35N. 139E.                                   91

=Numi=, Japan. 35N. 133E.                                     91

=Nundijal=, Madras. 16N. 78E.                                 62

=Nushki=, Baluchistan. 30N. 66E.                              45

=Nusumu=, Madras. 15N. 78E.                                   62

=Nusu Pemida=, East Indies. 9S. 116E.                         76

=Nutapkanshipe Is.=, Japan. 43N. 144E.                        88

=Nwangchik=, Malay Peninsula. 7N. 101E.                       68

=Nwedaung=, Burma. 20N. 97E.                                  67

=Nyaungywe=, Burma. 21N. 97E.                                 67

=Nysirus=, Asia Minor. 36N. 27E.                              46


=Obama=, Japan, 35N. 136E.                                    91

=Obdorsk=, Siberia. 66N. 67E.                                 94

=Obi=, East Indies. 2S. 127E.                                 75

=Obi, Gulf of=, Siberia. 68N. 72E.                            94

=Obi, River=, Siberia. 66N. 68E.                              94

=Odate=, Japan. 40N. 141E.                                    88

=Odawara=, Japan. 35N. 139E.                                  91

=Odemish=, Asia Minor. 38N. 27E.                              46

=Ogali=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                    91

=Ogi Cape=, Japan. 37N. 137E.                                 91

=Ogi Minato=, Japan. 38N. 138E.                               91

=Ohod=, Arabia. 24N. 41E.                                     44

=Ohorji=, Rajputana. 25N. 74E.                                59

=Oita=, Japan. 33N. 132E.                                     89

=Oka, River=, Siberia. 54N. 102E.                             94

=Okayama=, Japan. 35N. 134E.                                  91

=Okazaki=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                  91

=Okhotsk=, Siberia. 60N. 144E.                                95

=Okhotsk, Sea of=, Siberia. 54N. 150E.                        95

=Okhut=, Siberia. 56N. 156E.                                  95

=Okinawa-shima=, Lu-Chu Is. 27N. 128E.                        89

=Okinoerabu-shima=, Lu-Chu Is. 28N. 129E.                     89

=Oki Shima=, Japan. 36N. 133E.                                91

=Okpo=, Burma. 18N. 96E.                                      67

=Okushiri Island=, Japan. 42N. 140E.                          88

=Okushiri Strait=, Japan. 42N. 140E.                          88

=Old Kedah=, Malay Peninsula. 6N. 100E.                       68

=Olekima, River=, Siberia. 60N. 121E.                         95

=Olekminsk=, Siberia. 60N. 120E.                              95

=Olele=, East Indies. 5N. 95E.                                74

=Olenek River=, Siberia. 68N. 118E.                           94

=Olgantorsky, Cape=, Siberia. 60N. 170E.                      95

=Olives, Mount of=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                      12

=Oman=, Arabia. 23N. 57E.                                     45

=Oman, Gulf of=, Arabia. 25N. 58E.                            45

=Olympus Mt.=, Asia Minor. 40N. 30E.                          46

=Ombay Island=, East Indies. 8S. 125E.                        75

=Omerkot=, Punjab. 29N. 70E.                                  59

=Ominato=, Japan. 41N. 141E.                                  88

=Omogun, River=, Siberia. 52N. 136E.                          95

=Omol hotun=, Mongolia. 44N. 115E.                            83

=Omon, River=, Siberia. 52N. 114E.                            95

=O-mo-so=, Manchuria. 44N. 128E.                              90

[*]=Omsk=, Asiatic Russia. 55N. 74E.                          94

=Omuta=, Japan. 33N. 131E.                                    89

=Ongin=, Inner Mongolia. 39N. 108E.                           82

=Ongole=, Madras. 16N. 80E.                                   62

=Onim=, East Indies. 3S. 133E.                                75

=Onimechi=, Japan. 34N. 133E.                                 91

=Onmaye Cape=, Japan. 35N. 138E.                              91

=Ono=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                   12

=On-song=, Korea. 43N. 130E.                                  90

[*]=Ophir, Mount=, Malay Pen. 2N. 103E.                       69

=Ordos=, Inner Mongolia. 40N. 109E.                           82

=Orissa=, Bengal. 21N. 86E.                                   61

[*]=Ormuz Island=, Persia. 27N. 56E.                          45

=Ormuz Strait=, Persia. 26N. 57E.                             45

=Orr-tau-ho R.=, Manchuria. 43N. 127E.                        90

[*]=Osaka=, Japan. 35N. 136E.                                 91

=Oshima=, Japan. 35N. 139E.                                   91

=Oshima Island=, Japan. 41N. 140E.                            88

=Osmanabad=, Haidarabad. 18N. 76E.                            62

=Osmanjik=, Asia Minor. 41N. 35E.                             46

=Ota=, Manchuria. 45N. 129E.                                  90

=Otaru=, Japan. 43N. 141E.                                    88

=O-to-cheng=, Manchuria. 43N. 128E.                           90

=Ot-po=, Burma. 18N. 95E.                                     67

=Otsu=, Japan. 35N. 136E.                                     91

=Ottok=, Inner Mongolia. 39N. 108E.                           82

=Oudh=, United Provinces. 27N. 83E.                           60

=Oukin Island=, Lu-Chu Is. 28N. 129E.                         89

=Owajima=, Japan. 33N. 133E.                                  91

=Owari=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                    91

=Owari Bay=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                91

=Owashi=, Japan. 34N. 136E.                                   91

=Owen Island=, Burma, 11N. 98E.                               71

=Owen Stanley Mt.=, E. Indies. 9S. 149E.                      75

=Oyama=, Japan. 35N. 134E.                                    91

=Ozerni, Cape=, Siberia. 58N. 164E.                           95


=Pa=, China. 32N. 107E.                                       84

=Pa=, China. 39N. 116E.                                       83

=Pabna=, Bengal. 24N. 89E.                                    61

=Pachim=, Siam. 14N. 101E.                                    71

=Pachitan=, Java. 8S. 111E.                                   76

=Pachpadra=, Rajputana. 26N. 72E.                             59

=Pa-chum=, Indo-China. 18N. 104E.                             70

=Padam=, Kashmir. 33N. 77E.                                   58

[*]=Padang=, East Indies, 1S. 100E.                           74

=Padang=, East Indies. 2S. 107E.                              74

=Padaram, Cape=, Indo-China. 11N. 109E.                       71

=Padaung=, Burma. 19N. 95E.                                   67

=Pagan=, Burma. 21N. 95E.                                     67

=Pagatan=, Borneo. 4S. 116E.                                  76

=Pagattan=, Borneo. 3S. 113E.                                 76

=Pagoda Point=, Burma. 16N. 94E.                              67

=Pahang=, Malay Peninsula. 4N. 102E.                          69

=Pahang River=, Malay Pen. 3N. 103E.                          69

=Pahtia=, Malay Peninsula, 11N. 99E.                          71

=Pai-ho=, China. 41N. 116E.                                   83

=Paik-un-san=, Korea. 40N. 128E.                              90

=Pai-lu-shan=, China. 25N. 116E.                              85

=Pain River=, Berar. 20N. 79E.                                57

=Pai-shui=, China. 32N. 106E.                                 82

=Pajam=, Madras. 18N. 84E.                                    62

=Pajapur=, Bombay. 16N. 75E.                                  57

=Pakal=, Madras. 13N. 79E.                                    63

=Pa-kau=, China. 41N. 119E.                                   83

=Pakhan-nge=, Burma. 21N. 95E.                                67

=Pakhangyi=, Burma. 22N. 95E.                                 67

=Pak-hoi=, China. 21N. 109E.                                  84

=Paklai=, Indo-China. 18N. 102E.                              70

=Paklan=, Malay Peninsula. 9N. 99E.                           71

=Pak-mon=, Indo-China. 19N. 102E.                             70

=Paknam, Fort=, Siam. 13N. 101E.                              71

=Paknampo=, Siam. 16N. 100E.                                  70

=Pakokku=, Burma. 21N. 95E.                                   67

[*]=Pakpatan=, Punjab. 30N. 73E.                              58

=Pakta=, Indo-China. 20N. 101E.                               70

[*]=Palakkat=, Madras. 11N. 77E.                              63

=Palakonda=, Madras. 19N. 84E.                                62

=Palaman=, Bengal. 24N. 84E.                                  60

=Palana=, Rajputana. 28N. 73E.                                59

=Palanan=, Philippine Islands. 17N. 122E.                     77

=Palaos=, East Indies. 9N. 135E.                              75

=Palas=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 35N. 73E.                       58

=Palatupane=, Ceylon. 6N. 81E.                                63

=Palawan=, Philippine Islands, 10N. 118E.                     77

=Palean=, Malay Peninsula. 7N. 100E.                          71

[*]=Palembang=, East Indies. 3S. 105E.                        74

=Paletwa=, Burma. 21N. 93E.                                   67

=Pali=, Bombay. 23N. 73E.                                     56

=Pali=, Rajputana. 26N. 73E.                                  59

=Palk Strait=, Madras. 10N. 80E.                              63

=Palkot=, Bengal. 23N. 85E.                                   60

=Pallamcottah=, Madras. 9N. 78E.                              63

=Pallas Mt.=, Malay Peninsula. 4N. 103E.                      68

[*]=Palmyra=, Turkey in Asia. 34N. 39E.                       47

=Palmyra Point=, Ceylon. 10N. 80E.                            63

=Palmyras Point=, Bengal. 21N. 87E.                           61

=Palni=, Madras. 10N. 78E.                                    63

=Palni Hills=, Madras. 10N. 77E.                              63

=Palo=, Burma. 19N. 95E.                                      67

=Palos=, East Indies. 1S. 119E.                               74

=Paltee Lake=, Tibet. 29N. 91E.                               61

=Palu=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 40E.                             47

=Pamara=, Sind. 27N. 69E.                                     59

=Pamekasan=, Java. 7S. 113E.                                  76

=Pameungpeuk=, Java. 8S. 108E.                                76

=Pamir Plateau=, Central Asia. 38N. 74E.                      45

=Panay=, Philippine Islands. 11N. 122E.                       77

[*]=Pandharpur=, Bombay. 18N. 75E.                            57

=Pane River=, Sumatra. 2N. 100E.                              69

=Pangal=, Haidarabad. 16N. 78E.                               62

=Panganur=, Madras. 13N. 79E.                                 63

=Pangkok=, Borneo. 3S. 114E.                                  76

=Pangul=, Java. 8S. 111E.                                     76

=Pangutarang Is.=, Philippine Is. 6N. 120E.                   77

[*]=Panipat=, Punjab. 29N. 77E.                               59

=Panjang=, Malay Peninsula. 8N. 99E.                          71

=Panjang Is.=, East Indies. 7S. 116E.                         76

=Panjar River=, Bombay. 21N. 75E.                             56

[*]=Panjim=, Bombay. 15N. 74E.                                57

=Panjkora River=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 36N. 72E.              58

=Pannealla=, Haidarabad. 18N. 78E.                            62

=Panom=, Siam. 17N. 105E.                                     70

=Pan-ta-naw=, Burma. 17N. 96E.                                67

=Pantar Island=, East Indies. 8S. 124E.                       75

=Pao-kang=, China. 32N. 112E.                                 84

=Pao-king=, China. 27N. 111E.                                 84

=Pao-ngan=, China. 37N. 109E.                                 82

=Pao-ngan=, China. 40N. 115E.                                 83

=Pao-ning=, China. 31N. 106E.                                 84

=Pao-te=, China. 39N. 111E.                                   82

=Pao-ting=, China. 39N. 116E.                                 83

=Pao-tu=, Inner Mongolia. 41N. 110E.                          82

=Papandajan=, Java. 8S. 108E.                                 76

=Papra Strait=, Malay Pen. 8N. 98E.                           71

=Papua=, East Indies. 5S. 141E.                               75

=Papua, Gulf of=, East Indies. 8S. 144E.                      75

=Papun=, Burma. 18N. 97E.                                     67

=Parachinar=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 34N. 70E.                  58

=Paragarh=, Madras. 20N. 83E.                                 62

=Paranda=, Haidarabad. 18N. 75E.                              62

=Parantij=, Bombay. 24N. 73E.                                 56

=Parbaini=, Haidarabad. 19N. 77E.                             62

=Parbati River=, Rajputana. 26N. 77E.                         59

=Pardi=, Bombay. 22N. 73E.                                    56

=Pare Pare=, East Indies. 4S. 120E.                           74

=Pargarh=, Bombay. 17N. 73E.                                  57

=Parigi=, Java. 8S. 108E.                                     76

=Partabgarh=, Rajputana. 24N. 75E.                            59

=Partur=, Haidarabad. 20N. 76E.                               62

=Pase=, Siam. 13N. 102E.                                      71

=Passani=, Baluchistan. 25N. 62E.                             45

=Passin=, East Indies. 2S. 116E.                              74

=Passir=, East Indies. 5N. 97E.                               74

=Pa-ta-ho River=, China. 24N. 105E.                           84

=Patalung=, Malay Peninsula. 8N. 100E.                        71

=Patan=, Nepal. 28N. 86E.                                     60

=Patan=, Rajputana. 28N. 76E.                                 59

=Patani=, Malay Peninsula. 7N. 101E.                          68

=Patani, Cape=, Malay Pen. 7N. 101E.                          68

=Pataudi=, Punjab. 28N. 77E.                                  59

=Pathai-sung=, Siam. 15N. 103E.                               70

=Pathankot=, Punjab. 32N. 76E.                                58

=Pati=, Java. 7S. 111E.                                       76

=Patiala=, Punjab. 30N. 76E.                                  58

=Patience Bay=, Siberia. 49N. 143E.                           95

=Patience, Cape=, Siberia. 49N. 144E.                         95

=Patjitan=, East Indies. 8S. 111E.                            74

=Patkai Hills=, Burma. 27N. 96E.                              67

=Patmos=, Asia Minor. 37N. 27E.                               46

[*]=Patna=, Bengal. 26N. 85E.                                 60

=Patna=, Central Provinces. 21N. 83E.                         60

=Patrang=, Siam. 14N. 102E.                                   71

=Patri=, Bombay. 23N. 72E.                                    56

=Patri=, Haidarabad. 19N. 76E.                                62

=Pa-tung=, China. 31N. 110E.                                  84

=Paumben Island=, Ceylon. 9N. 79E.                            63

=Paungdeh=, Burma. 19N. 96E.                                  67

=Pawgurh=, Mysore. 14N. 77E.                                  63

=Pawn=, Burma. 20N. 100E.                                     67

=Paygan=, East Indies. 19N. 145E.                             75

=Pechabun=, Siam. 16N. 101E.                                  70

=Pechaburi=, Siam. 13N. 100E.                                 71

=Pechai=, Siam. 17N. 100E.                                    70

=Pedrotallagalla, Mt.=, Ceylon. 7N. 81E.                      63

[*]=Pegu=, Burma. 18N. 96E.                                   67

=Pei=, China. 34N. 118E.                                      83

=Pei-hai=, China. 21N. 109E.                                  84

=Pei-kiang River=, China. 25N. 113E.                          85

=Pei-ling-shan=, China. 34N. 105E.                            82

=Peint=, Bombay. 20N. 74E.                                    56

=Pei-shan Mt.=, Manchuria. 42N. 128E.                         90

=Pei-tang=, China. 39N. 118E.                                 83

=Pei-tuan-lin-tsu=, Manchuria. 46N. 127E.                     90

=Pe-kai=, China. 27N. 106E.                                   84

=Pekalongan=, Java. 7S. 110E.                                 76

=Pekan=, Malay Peninsula. 3N. 103E.                           69

=Peking=, China. 40N. 116E.                                   83

=Pelew=, East Indies. 9N. 135E.                               75

=Peling Island=, East Indies. 1S. 124E.                       75

=Pella=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                                 13

=Pemalang=, Java. 7S. 110E.                                   76

=Pemanggil=, South China Sea. 3N. 104E.                       69

=Pembuang, Cape=, Borneo. 4S. 112E.                           76

=Penang=, Malacca Strait. 5N. 100E.                           68

=Pendjeh=, Turkestan. 36N. 62E.                               45

=Pengaron=, Borneo. 3S. 115E.                                 76

=Peng-shui=, China. 29N. 108E.                                84

=Peng-tsz=, China. 30N. 117E.                                 85

=Penjinsk, Gulf of=, Siberia. 62N. 162E.                      95

=Penjinskoe=, Siberia. 62N. 164E.                             95

=Pennan Channel=, Malay Pen. 10N. 100E.                       71

=Pennar River=, Madras. 12N. 80E.                             63

=Pennar River=, Madras. 15N. 80E.                             62

=Peper Bay=, Java. 6S. 106E.                                  76

=Peræa=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                                 13

=Perak=, East Indies. 4N. 101E.                               74

=Perak Mt.=, Malay Peninsula. 6N. 101E.                       68

=Perak R.=, Malay Peninsula. 5N. 101E.                        68

=Perforated Is.=, Malay Pen. 9N. 98E.                         71

=Perhentian Is.=, S. China Sea. 6N. 103E.                     68

=Perlis=, Malay Peninsula. 6N. 100E.                          68

=Persepolis=, Persia. 30N. 53E.                               45

=Persian Baluchistan=, Persia. 25N. 60E.                      45

=Persian Gulf.= 28N. 52E. 44,                                 45

=Peru Island=, East Indies. 21N. 141E.                        75

=Pescadores Chan.=, Formosa. 23N. 120E.                       89

=Pescadores Island=, China. 24N. 119E.                        89

=Peshawar=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 34N. 72E.                    58

=Petlad=, Bombay. 22N. 73E.                                   56

=Petrieu=, Siam. 14N. 101E.                                   71

=Petropavlovsk=, Siberia. 53N. 159E.                          95

=Phalera=, Rajputana. 27N. 75E.                               59

=Phalian=, Punjab. 32N. 74E.                                  58

=Phalodi=, Rajputana. 27N. 72E.                               59

=Phaltan=, Bombay. 18N. 74E.                                  57

=Philadelphia=, Palestine. 32N. 56E.                          13

=Philippine Is.=, East Indies. 14N. 123E.                     75

=Phillour=, Punjab. 31N. 76E.                                 58

=Phineka Bay=, Asia Minor. 36N. 30E.                          46

=Phrayow=, Siam. 19N. 100E.                                   70

=Phu-lang-thuong=, Indo-China. 21N. 106E.                     70

=Phu-li=, Indo-China. 21N. 106E.                              70

=Phu-my=, Indo-China. 14N. 109E.                              71

=Phung-chhen=, Korea. 38N. 125E.                              90

=Phuyen=, Indo-China. 13N. 109E.                              71

=Phyeng-An, North=, Korea. 40N. 126E.                         90

=Phyeng-An, South=, Korea. 39N. 126E.                         90

=Phyeng-san=, Korea. 38N. 126E.                               90

=Phyeng-yang=, Korea. 39N. 126E.                              90

=Piasini, River=, Siberia. 74N. 86E.                          94

=Pichit=, Siam. 17N. 100E.                                    70

=Piju=, Lombok. 9S. 117E.                                     76

=Pi-kau=, China. 33N. 105E.                                   82

=Pilibhit=, United Provinces. 29N. 80E.                       60

=Pimai=, Siam. 15N. 102E.                                     70

=Pimun=, Siam. 15N. 105E.                                     70

=Pin=, China. 35N. 108E.                                      82

=Pin=, China. 37N. 118E.                                      83

=Pinan=, Formosa. 22N. 121E.                                  89

=Pin-chau=, China. 23N. 109E.                                 84

=Ping-fan=, China. 37N. 104E.                                 82

=Ping-kiang=, China. 28N. 114E.                               85

=Ping-liang=, China. 35N. 106E.                               82

=Ping-lo=, China. 24N. 111E.                                  84

=Ping-lo=, China. 39N. 106E.                                  82

=Pingmar, Cape=, China. 20N. 109E.                            84

=Ping-nan=, China. 27N. 119E.                                 85

=Ping-shan=, China. 29N. 104E.                                84

=Ping-siang River=, China. 27N. 113E.                         85

=Ping-ting=, China. 38N. 114E.                                83

=Ping-tu=, China. 37N. 120E.                                  83

=Ping-yang=, China. 28N. 120E.                                85

=Ping-yang=, China. 36N. 112E.                                82

=Ping-yang=, China. 37N. 106E.                                82

=Ping-yang=, Korea. 39N. 125E.                                90

=Ping-yao=, China. 37N. 112E.                                 82

=Ping-yue=, China. 27N. 107E.                                 84

=Pipar=, Rajputana. 26N. 74E.                                 59

=Pippli=, Bengal. 22N. 88E.                                   61

=Pirate Island=, Indo-China. 21N. 108E.                       70

=Pishin=, Baluchistan. 31N. 67E.                              58

=Pishpek=, Asiatic Russia. 44N. 75E.                          94

=Pitsanulok=, Siam. 17N. 100E.                                70

=Pi-tse-wo=, Manchuria. 39N. 122E.                            90

=Pi-tsie=, China. 27N. 106E.                                  84

=Plassy=, Bengal. 24N. 88E.                                   61

=Plothistche Stroenia=, Siberia. 63N. 149E.                   95

=Plus River=, Malay Peninsula. 5N. 101E.                      68

=Pnom Dong Rek=, Indo-China. 14N. 104E.                       71

=Pnom Penh=, Indo-China. 12N. 105E.                           71

=Po=, China. 34N. 116E.                                       83

=Po-hai=, Inner Mongolia. 38N. 104E.                          82

=Poi-tsao-kao=, Manchuria. 43N. 129E.                         90

=Pokaran=, Rajputana. 27N. 72E.                               59

=Polawaram=, Madras. 17N. 82E.                                62

=Polet=, Rajputana. 25N. 76E.                                 59

=Polgahawela=, Ceylon. 7N. 80E.                               63

=Polillo=, Philippine Islands. 15N. 122E.                     77

=Polloc=, Philippine Islands. 8N. 126E.                       77

=Pon=, Siam. 20N. 101E.                                       70

=Pondicherri=, Madras. 12N. 80E.                              63

=Pong=, China. 31N. 106E.                                     84

=Po-ngan=, China. 24N. 106E.                                  84

=Ponnani=, Madras, 11N. 76E.                                  63

=Pon-pissai=, Siam. 18N. 103E.                                70

=Pontianak=, East Indies. 0. 109E.                            74

=Pontic Ra=, Turkey in Asia. 40N. 38E.                        47

=Poona=, Bombay. 19N. 74E.                                    57

=Popa Hill=, Burma. 21N. 95E.                                 67

=Po-pai=, China. 22N. 110E.                                   84

=Pora, North=, East Indies. 1S. 98E.                          74

=Pora, South=, East Indies. 3S. 100E.                         74

=Por Bandar=, Bombay. 22N. 70E.                               56

=Port Adams=, Manchuria. 40N. 122E.                           90

=Port Aian=, Siberia. 57N. 138E.                              95

=Port Arthur=, Manchuria. 39N. 121E.                          90

=Port Lasarev=, Korea. 39N. 127E.                             90

=Porto Novo=, Madras. 11N. 80E.                               63

=Porto Princesa=, East Indies. 9N. 118E.                      74

=Po-se=, China. 24N. 106E.                                    84

=Po-shan=, China. 36N. 118E.                                  83

=Posolskoi=, Siberia. 52N. 106E.                              94

=Poudella=, Madras. 16N. 80E.                                 62

=Po-yang-hu=, China. 29N. 117E.                               85

=Prai=, Malay Peninsula. 5N. 100E.                            68

=Pran=, Siam. 12N. 100E.                                      71

=Preanger=, Java. 7S. 107E.                                   76

=Prince Harbour=, Korea. 36N. 127E.                           90

=Princes Island=, Asia Minor. 41N. 29E.                       46

=Princess Island=, Java. 7S. 105E.                            76

=Probolingo=, Java. 8S. 113E.                                 76

[*]=Prome=, Burma. 19N. 95E.                                  67

=Prome=, Siam. 15N. 100E.                                     71

=Providence Reef=, Lu-Chu Is. 25N. 125E.                      89

=Ptolemais=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                             13

=Pu-chau=, China. 35N. 110E.                                  82

=Puding, Cape=, Borneo. 4S. 112E.                             76

=Pudukattai=, Madras. 10N. 79E.                               63

=Puerto Princeso=, Philippine Is. 9N. 123E.                   77

=Puger=, Java. 8S. 114E.                                      76

=Pu-hua=, Indo-China. 17N. 105E.                              70

=Puhur=, Berar. 20N. 78E.                                     60

=Pu-kau=, China. 32N. 119E.                                   83

=Puk-chung=, Korea. 40N. 128E.                                90

=Pu-ki=, China. 30N. 114E.                                    85

=Pulaodo=, Bombay. 24N. 70E.                                  56

=Pulau Berhala=, S. China Sea. 3N. 104E.                      69

=Pulau Galang=, Malacca Strait. 1N. 104E.                     69

=Pulau Jara=, Malacca Strait. 4N. 100E.                       68

=Pulau Kapas=, S. China Sea. 5N. 103E.                        68

=Pulau Klang=, Malacca Strait. 3N. 101E.                      69

=Pulau Koendoer=, Malacca Str. 1N. 103E.                      69

=Pulau Kukub=, Malacca Strait. 1N. 103E.                      69

=Pulau Langkawi=, Malacca Str. 6N. 100E.                      68

=Pulau Lantai=, Malay Pen. 8N. 99E.                           71

=Pulau Mendol=, Malacca Strait. 1N. 103E.                     69

=Pulau Mohea=, Malay Pen. 7N. 99E.                            71

=Pulau Padang=, Malacca Strait. 1N. 102E.                     69

=Pulau Pangkor=, Malacca Str. 4N. 100E.                       68

=Pulau Rajah=, Malay Pen. 8N. 98E.                            71

=Pulau Rangsang=, Malacca Str. 1N. 103E.                      69

=Pulau Rantau=, Malacca Strait. 1N. 103E.                     69

=Pulau Rempang=, Malacca Str. 1N. 104E.                       69

=Pulau Rupat=, Malacca Strait. 2N. 102E.                      69

=Pulau Telibun=, Malay Pen. 7N. 100E.                         71

=Pulau Tenggol=, S. China Sea. 5N. 104E.                      68

=Pulau Terutau=, Malacca Str. 7N. 100E.                       68

=Pulau Tinggi=, S. China Sea. 2N. 104E.                       69

=Pulau Tuman=, S. China Sea. 3N. 104E.                        69

[*]=Pulicat=, Madras. 13N. 80E.                               63

=Pulicat Lake=, Madras. 14N. 80E.                             63

=Pulo Ceicer de Mer=, Indo-China. 11N. 109E.                  71

=Pulo Ceicer de Terre=, Indo-China. 11N. 109E.                71

=Pulo Condore=, Indo-China. 9N. 107E.                         71

=Pulo Dama=, Indo-China. 10N. 104E.                           71

=Pu-loi=, Indo-China. 20N. 103E.                              70

=Pulo Lawang=, East Indies. 0. 103E.                          74

=Pulo Tanjang=, Indo-China. 9N. 103E.                         71

=Pulo Wai=, Indo-China. 10N. 103E.                            71

=Pu Luong=, Indo-China. 19N. 104E.                            70

=Punakal=, Haidarabad. 19N. 79E.                              62

=Pungal=, Rajputana. 28N. 73E.                                59

=Pu-ngan=, China. 26N. 105E.                                  84

=Pu-ning=, China. 23N. 116E.                                  85

=Punjnad River=, Punjab. 29N. 71E.                            59

[*]=Punna=, Rajputana. 25N. 80E.                              60

=Purbatipur=, Bengal. 26N. 89E.                               61

[*]=Puri=, Bengal. 20N. 86E.                                  60

=Purlakimedi=, Madras. 19N. 84E.                              62

=Purna River=, Berar. 21N. 76E.                               60

=Purna River=, Haidarabad. 19N. 77E.                          62

=Purniah=, Bengal. 26N. 88E.                                  61

=Pursat=, Indo-China. 13N. 104E.                              71

=Purtaligurh=, United Provs. 26N. 82E.                        60

=Purulia=, Bengal. 23N. 86E.                                  61

=Purwakarta=, Java. 6S. 107E.                                 76

=Purworejo=, Java. 8S. 110E.                                  76

=Pu-sau Mt.=, Indo-China. 20N. 103E.                          70

=Pushti Kuh=, Persia. 34N.                                    47

=Pu-tai=, China. 37N. 118E.                                   83

=Putchum=, Bombay. 24N. 70E.                                  56

=Putlam=, Ceylon. 8N. 80E.                                    63

=Puttanapur=, Madras. 9N. 77E.                                63

=Puttocottah=, Madras. 11N. 79E.                              63

=Pya-ma-law River=, Burma. 16N. 95E.                          67

=Pya-pon=, Burma. 16N. 96E.                                   67

=Pyawbwe=, Burma. 21N. 96E.                                   67

=Pyen-kwan=, China. 40N. 111E.                                82

=Pyinmana=, Burma. 20N. 96E.                                  67

=Pyton=, Haidarabad. 20N. 75E.                                62

=Pyu=, Burma. 18N. 97E.                                       67


=Quang-yen=, Indo-China. 21N. 107E.                           70

=Quelpart Island=, Korea. 33N. 126E.                          90

=Quetta=, Punjab. 30N. 67E.                                   58

[*]=Quilon=, Madras. 9N. 77E.                                 63

=Qui-Nhon=, Indo-China. 14N. 109E.                            71

=Qust Viliusk=, Siberia. 64N. 121E.                           95


=Raas Island=, Java. 7S. 114E.                                76

=Rabbath-Ammon=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                         12

=Rabbath Moab=, Palestine. 31N. 36E.                          12

=Rabigh=, Arabia. 23N. 39E.                                   44

=Rachel's Tomb=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                         12

=Rach-gia=, Indo-China. 10N. 104E.                            71

=Rachutt=, Madras. 14N. 79E.                                  63

[*]=Radhan=, Sind. 27N. 68E.                                  59

=Raewind=, Punjab. 31N. 74E.                                  58

=Ragaba=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                                13

=Ragay Bay=, Philippine Is. 13N. 123E.                        77

=Raheng=, Siam. 17N. 99E.                                     70

=Rahoki Junction=, Sind. 25N. 69E.                            59

=Rahori=, Bombay. 19N. 75E.                                   57

[*]=Rahun=, Punjab. 31N. 76E.                                 58

=Rai Bareli=, United Provs. 26N. 81E.                         60

=Raiboka=, Bengal. 22N. 84E.                                  60

=Raichur=, Haidarabad. 16N. 77E.                              62

=Rai Droog=, Madras. 15N. 77E.                                62

=Raigarh=, Central Provinces. 22N. 83E.                       60

=Raigarh=, Madras. 20N. 82E.                                  62

=Raik-to-san=, Manchuria. 42N. 128E.                          90

=Raipur=, Central Provinces. 21N. 82E.                        60

=Raishahi=, Bengal. 25N. 89E.                                 61

=Rajagudi=, Madras. 19N. 83E.                                 62

=Rajamahendri=, Madras. 17N. 82E.                             62

=Rajapalayam=, Madras. 9N. 77E.                               63

=Rajar=, Sind. 27N. 69E.                                      59

=Rajaur=, Kashmir. 33N. 74E.                                  58

=Rajgarh=, Rajputana. 29N. 75E.                               59

=Rajim=, Central Provinces. 21N. 82E.                         60

=Rajkot=, Bombay. 22N. 71E.                                   56

=Rajmahal=, Bengal. 25N. 88E.                                 61

=Rajpipla=, Bombay. 22N. 74E.                                 56

=Rajpur=, Central India. 22N. 74E.                            56

=Rajpura=, Punjab. 30N. 77E.                                  58

=Ra-ju Island=, Korea. 35N. 126E.                             90

=Rajura=, Haidarabad. 20N. 79E.                               62

=Rakapulli=, Madras. 18N. 81E.                                62

=Rakka=, Turkey in Asia. 36N. 39E.                            47

=Ramah=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                 12

=Ramas, Cape=, Bombay. 15N. 74E.                              57

=Rameswaram Island=, Madras. 9N. 79E.                         63

=Ramgarh=, Bengal. 24N. 85E.                                  60

=Ramgarh=, Central India. 22N. 75E.                           56

=Ramgarh=, Central Provs. 23N. 81E.                           60

=Ramgir=, Haidarabad. 19N. 80E.                               62

=Ramjapatnam=, Madras. 15N. 80E.                              62

[*]=Ramnad=, Madras. 9N. 79E.                                 63

[*]=Ramnagar=, Punjab. 32N. 74E.                              58

=Ramoo=, Burma. 21N. 92E.                                     61

=Ramoth Gilead=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                         12

=Rampur=, Bengal. 24N. 89E.                                   61

=Rampur=, Punjab. 31N. 78E.                                   58

=Rampur=, United Provinces. 29N. 79E.                         60

=Rampura=, Rajputana. 26N. 76E.                               59

=Ramri=, Burma. 19N. 94E.                                     67

=Ramri Island=, Burma. 19N. 94E.                              67

=Ramshai Hai=, Bengal. 27N. 89E.                              61

=Ranawri=, Malay Peninsula. 10N. 99E.                         71

=Ranchi=, Bengal. 23N. 86E.                                   60

=Ranga=, Malay Peninsula. 6N. 102E.                           68

=Rangamati=, Bengal. 26N. 90E.                                61

=Rangamati=, Burma. 23N. 93E.                                 61

[*]=Rangoon=, Burma. 17N. 96E.                                67

=Rangoon River=, Burma. 17N. 96E.                             67

=Rangpur=, Bengal. 26N. 89E.                                  61

=Rangpur=, Punjab. 31N. 71E.                                  58

=Rania=, Punjab. 30N. 75E.                                    58

=Raniganj=, Bengal. 24N. 87E.                                 61

=Ranikhet=, United Provinces. 30N. 79E.                       60

=Ranipur=, Sind. 27N. 68E.                                    59

=Rannipur=, Bombay. 22N. 74E.                                 56

=Rantau=, Borneo. 3S. 115E.                                   76

=Rantau Panjang=, Malay Pen. 2N. 103E.                        69

=Rasan=, Sumatra. 2N. 100E.                                   69

=Ras el Hadd=, Arabia. 23N. 60E.                              45

=Ras Fartak=, Arabia. 16N. 52E.                               45

=Rashin=, Bombay. 19N. 75E.                                   57

=Ras Madrack=, Arabia. 19N. 58E.                              45

=Rass=, Arabia. 26N. 42E.                                     44

=Ratburi=, Siam. 14N. 100E.                                   71

=Ratnagiri=, Bombay. 17N. 73E.                                57

=Rattangarh=, Rajputana. 28N. 75E.                            59

=Raub=, Malay Peninsula. 4N. 102E.                            69

=Raung Mountain=, Java. 8S. 114E.                             76

=Ravi River=, Punjab. 31N. 72E.                               58

[*]=Rawal Pindi=, Punjab. 34N. 73E.                           58

=Rawnina-golyb Gobi=, Inner Mongolia. 43N. 107E.              82

=Rawra=, Bombay. 20N. 74E.                                    56

=Raxoul=, Bengal. 27N. 85E.                                   60

=Rayapur=, Bombay. 17N. 73E.                                  57

=Ra-yong=, Siam. 13N. 101E.                                   71

=Redang, Great=, S. China Sea. 6N. 103E.                      68

=Redang, Little=, S. China Sea. 6N. 103E.                     68

=Reducto, Yolo=, Philippine Is. 6N. 121E.                     77

=Rembang=, Java. 7S. 111E.                                    76

=Repally=, Madras. 16N. 81E.                                  62

=Repunshiri Island=, Japan. 45N. 141E.                        88

=Resht=, Persia. 38N. 50E.                                    47

=Reti=, Punjab. 28N. 70E.                                     59

=Reuben=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                                12

=Rewah=, Central India. 24N. 81E.                             60

=Rewari=, Punjab. 28N. 77E.                                   59

=Rhadanpur=, Bombay. 24N. 71E.                                56

=Rhaman=, Malay Peninsula. 6N. 101E.                          68

[*]=Rhodes=, Asia Minor. 36N. 28E.                            46

=Riad, East=, Arabia. 25N. 47E.                               44

=Riassi=, Kashmir. 33N. 75E.                                  58

=Rikuoko=, Japan. 41N. 141E.                                  88

=Rimmon=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                12

=Rindli=, Baluchistan. 30N. 68E.                              58

=Rinjami, Mount=, Lombok. 8S. 117E.                           76

=Rio=, East Indies. 1N. 104E.                                 74

=Ri Shima=, Japan. 35N. 139E.                                 91

=Rishiri Island=, Japan. 45N. 141E.                           88

=Rivandere=, Persia. 36N.                                     47

=Roba-el-Khali, Sandy Desert of=, Arabia. 21N. 50E. 44,       45

=Rohri=, Sind. 28N. 69E.                                      59

[*]=Rohtak=, Punjab. 29N. 77E.                                59

=Rokan River, North=, Sumatra. 2N. 101E.                      69

=Rokan River, South=, Sumatra. 2N. 101E.                      69

=Rokko=, Formosa. 24N. 120E.                                  89

=Roma=, East Indies. 7S. 127E.                                75

=Romanzov Bay=, Japan. 45N. 142E.                             88

=Romblon=, Philippine Islands. 13N. 122E.                     77

=Ross Island=, Korea. 34N. 125E.                              90

=Rota=, East Indies. 14N. 145E.                               75

=Rotasgurh=, Bengal. 25N. 84E.                                60

=Rotti=, East Indies. 11S. 124E.                              75

=Ruhtas=, Punjab. 33N. 74E.                                   58

=Rukshu=, Kashmir. 33N. 78E.                                  58

=Rumenia, Cape=, Malay Pen. 1N. 104E.                         69

=Rumpin River=, Malay Pen. 3N. 103E.                          69

=Rupa=, Punjab. 31N. 77E.                                     58

=Rupat Strait=, Sumatra. 2N. 102E.                            69

=Rupti River=, United Provs. 26N. 84E.                        60

=Rurumoppe=, Japan. 43N. 142E.                                88

=Russelkonda=, Madras. 20N. 85E.                              62

=Ruttunpur=, Central Provs. 22N. 82E.                         60


=Sa=, Siam. 19N. 101E.                                        70

=Saba=, East Indies. 5N. 116E.                                74

=Sabanrika River=, Bengal. 22N. 88E.                          61

=Sabara=, Arabia. 26N. 52E.                                   45

=Sab Asphal=, Turkey in Asia. 36N. 44E.                       47

[*]=Sabraon=, Punjab. 31N. 75E.                               58

=Saccol=, Philippine Islands. 7N. 122E.                       77

=Sachad=, Sind. 28N. 69E.                                     59

=Sadakam=, East Indies. 6N. 118E.                             74

=Sadargarh=, Rajputana. 27N. 70E.                             59

=Sadazaki=, Japan. 33N. 133E.                                 89

=Sadiya=, Assam. 28N. 96E.                                    67

=Sado=, Japan. 38N. 138E.                                     88

=Sadwan=, Arabia. 19N. 43E.                                   44

=Safed Koh=, Afghanistan. 34N. 71E.                           58

=Safed Koh=, Afghanistan. 35N. 64E.                           45

=Saga=, Burma. 20N. 97E.                                      67

=Saga=, Japan. 33N. 130E.                                     89

=Sagaing=, Burma. 22N. 96E.                                   67

=Sagami=, Japan. 35N. 139E.                                   91

=Sagar=, Haidarabad. 17N. 77E.                                62

=Sagar=, Central Provinces. 24N. 79E.                         60

=Sagwe=, Burma. 20N. 97E.                                     67

=Saharanpur=, United Provs. 30N. 78E.                         60

=Sahund Mountain=, Persia. 38N. 46E.                          47

=Sai=, Indo-China. 21N. 102E.                                 70

=Sai=, Kashmir. 35N. 75E.                                     58

=Saibai Island=, East Indies. 9S. 124E.                       75

=Saiburi=, Malay Peninsula. 6N. 102E.                         68

=Saidapet=, Madras. 13N. 80E.                                 63

[*]=Saigon=, Indo-China. 11N. 107E.                           71

=Saigon River=, Indo-China. 11N. 107E.                        71

=Sai-kao=, Siam. 17N. 102E.                                   70

=Saiki=, Japan. 33N. 132E.                                    89

=St. Andrew Is.=, East Indies. 5N. 133E.                      75

=St. Augustin C.=, Philippine Is. 6N. 126E.                   77

=St. Augustino Is.=, E. Indies. 24N. 140E.                    75

=St. Bern Strait=, East Indies. 13N. 125E.                    75

=St. Bernardino Strait=, Philippine Is. 14N. 121E.            77

=St. David Is.=, East Indies. 1N. 135E.                       75

=St. Jacques, Cape=, Indo-China. 10N. 107E.                   71

=St. John Island=, China. 21N. 113E.                          85

=St. John Island=, Siberia. 56N. 144E.                        95

=St. Lucia Bay=, East Indies. 4N. 118E.                       74

=St. Mathias Is.=, East Indies. 1S. 149E.                     75

=St. Matthew Island=, Burma. 10N. 98E.                        71

=St. Paul Island=, Siberia. 76N. 112E.                        94

=St. Sen=, Indo-China. 13N. 105E.                             71

=Sakai=, Japan. 35N. 133E.                                    91

=Sakai=, Japan. 34N. 135E.                                    91

=Sakai=, Japan. 36N. 136E.                                    91

=Sakaria River=, Asia Minor. 41N. 31E.                        46

=Sakata=, Japan. 39N. 140E.                                   88

=Sakhalin Island=, Siberia. 50N. 143E.                        95

=Sakhne=, Turkey in Asia. 35N. 39E.                           47

=Sak-ju=, Korea. 40N. 125E.                                   90

=Sakon-Lakon=, Siam. 17N. 104E.                               70

=Sakri=, Rajputana. 25N. 72E.                                 59

=Salang Island=, Malay Pen. 8N. 98E.                          71

=Salawatti Island=, East Indies. 1S. 132E.                    75

=Salayer Island=, East Indies. 6S. 120E.                      74

[*]=Salem=, Madras. 12N. 78E.                                 63

=Salgera=, Haidarabad. 19N. 77E.                              62

=Salher=, Bombay. 21N. 74E.                                   56

=Salimpur=, United Provinces. 26N. 84E.                       60

=Salin=, Burma. 21N. 95E.                                     67

=Salmi=, Madras. 19N. 82E.                                    62

=Salset Island=, Bombay. 19N. 73E.                            57

=Salt Plain=, Persia. 36N. 55E.                               45

=Salt Range Mts.=, Punjab. 33N. 72E.                          58

=Salumbar=, Rajputana. 24N. 74E.                              59

=Saluru=, Madras. 18N. 83E.                                   62

=Salwin River=, Burma. 17N. 98E.                              67

=Samagarn=, Siberia. 50N. 137E.                               95

=Samalkotta=, Madras. 17N. 82E.                               62

=Samar=, Philippine Islands. 12N. 125E.                       77

=Samara=, Turkey in Asia. 34N. 44E.                           47

=Samarang=, Java. 7S. 111E.                                   76

=Samargha=, Afghanistan. 32N. 69E.                            58

[*]=Samaria=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                            13

=Samarinda=, East Indies. 0. 117E.                            74

[*]=Samarkand=, Turkestan. 40N. 67E.                          45

=Samasata=, Punjab. 29N. 72E.                                 59

=Sambalpur=, Central Provs. 22N. 84E.                         60

=Sambar=, Rajputana. 27N. 75E.                                59

=Sambar, Cape=, Borneo. 3S. 110E.                             76

=Sambar Lake=, Rajputana. 27N. 75E.                           59

[*]=Sambhal=, United Provinces. 29N. 79E.                     60

=Sambiliung=, East Indies. 2N. 117E.                          74

=Sambor=, Indo-China. 13N. 106E.                              71

=Sam-chhek=, Korea. 37N. 129E.                                90

=Samit Cape=, Indo-China. 11N. 103E.                          71

=Samit Island=, Siam. 13N. 102E.                              71

=Samos=, Asia Minor. 37N. 27E.                                46

=Sampang=, Java. 7S. 113E.                                    76

=Sampit River=, Borneo. 3S. 113E.                             76

[*]=Samsat=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 39E.                        47

=Samshui=, China. 23N. 113E.                                  85

=Samsun=, Asia Minor. 41N. 36E.                               46

=Samuie Strait=, Malay Pen. 9N. 100E.                         71

[*]=Sana=, Arabia. 15N. 45E.                                  44

=San-cha=, China. 34N. 107E.                                  82

=San-chau Island=, China. 22N. 114E.                          85

=Sandalwood Is.=, East Indies. 10S. 120E.                     74

=Sandeman, Fort=, Punjab. 31N. 69E.                           58

=Sandon Island=, Lu-Chu Is. 29N. 130E.                        89

=Sandoway=, Burma. 18N. 94E.                                  67

=Sandur=, Kysore. 15N. 77E.                                   62

=San-fa River=, Manchuria. 44N. 127E.                         90

=San Fernando=, Philippine Is. 17N. 121E.                     77

=Sangamner=, Bombay. 20N. 74E.                                57

=Sanganer=, Rajputana. 25N. 75E.                              59

=Sanga Pass=, Punjab. 31N. 71E.                               58

=Sangareddipet=, Haidarabad. 18N. 78E.                        62

=Sang-chi=, China. 29N. 110E.                                 84

=Sangir Island=, East Indies. 3N. 125E.                       75

=Sang-ju=, Korea. 36N. 128E.                                  90

=Sangkapura=, East Indies. 6S. 113E.                          74

=Sang-kou=, China. 37N. 123E.                                 83

=Sangla=, Kashmir. 34N. 77E.                                  58

=Sangod=, Rajputana. 25N. 76E.                                59

=Sangrur=, Punjab. 30N. 76E.                                  58

=San-ho, Cape=, Indo-China. 14N. 109E.                        71

=Saniaburi=, Siam. 18N. 104E.                                 70

=San Ildefonso Cape=, Philippine Islands. 16N. 122E.          77

=Sanindo=, Japan. 35N. 134E.                                  91

=Sanjo=, Japan. 38N. 139E.                                    91

=San Jose de Buenavista=, Philippine Is. 11N. 122E.           77

=Sankasala=, Madras. 16N. 78E.                                62

=San-kio=, China. 26N. 108E.                                  84

=San-mun Bay=, China. 29N. 122E.                              85

=Sano=, Japan. 36N. 140E.                                     91

=San Pedro B.=, Philippine Is. 11N. 125E.                     77

=San-sa Inlet=, China. 26N. 120E.                             85

=San-shui=, China. 35N. 108E.                                 82

=San-sin=, Manchuria. 46N. 129E.                              90

=Santa Maria=, Philippine Is. 8N. 122E.                       77

=San-tao-ho=, Inner Mongolia. 40N. 107E.                      82

=San Tomas Mt.=, Philippine Is. 16N. 121E.                    77

=San-tuao=, China. 27N. 120E.                                 85

=Sanuki=, Japan. 34N. 134E.                                   91

=Sanyodo=, Japan. 35N. 134E.                                  91

=Sao=, Formosa. 25N. 122E.                                    89

=Sapat=, Indo-China. 16N. 106E.                               70

=Sapporo=, Japan. 42N. 141E.                                  88

=Sapudi Island=, Java. 7S. 114E.                              76

=Sapudi Strait=, Java. 7S. 114E.                              76

=Saraga=, Japan. 35N. 138E.                                   91

=Saraikalu=, Bengal. 23N. 86E.                                60

=Sarangani=, Philippine Is. 5N. 125E.                         77

=Sarangani B.=, Philippine Is. 6N. 125E.                      77

=Sarap River=, Kashmir. 34N. 77E.                             58

=Saraswati=, Bombay. 24N. 72E.                                56

=Saratsi=, China. 41N. 111E.                                  82

=Saravan=, Indo-China. 16N. 106E.                             70

=Sarawak=, East Indies. 2N. 110E.                             74

=Sarawak Prov.=, East Indies. 3N. 112E.                       74

=Sarawan=, Baluchistan. 28N. 65E.                             45

=Saree=, Persia. 36N. 53E.                                    45

=Sarepta=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                               13

=Sarifah=, Turkey in Asia. 34N. 42E.                          47

=Sariguan=, East Indies. 17N. 145E.                           75

=Sart=, Asia Minor. 38N. 28E.                                 46

=Sartu=, Manchuria. 46N. 125E.                                90

=Saru=, Japan. 42N. 142E.                                     88

=Sasayama=, Japan. 35N. 135E.                                 91

=Saschiveisk=, Siberia. 66N. 142E.                            95

=Sasebo=, Japan. 33N. 130E.                                   89

[*]=Sasseram=, Bengal. 25N. 84E.                              60

=Sassun=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 41E.                           47

=Sasuna=, Japan. 35N. 130E.                                   89

=Satara=, Bombay. 18N. 74E.                                   57

=Sathalanu=, Rajputana. 26N. 73E.                             59

=Satpura Range=, Bombay. 22N. 75E.                            56

=Satui=, Borneo. 4S. 115E.                                    76

=Satun=, Malay Peninsula. 7N. 100E.                           68

=Satur=, Madras. 9N. 78E.                                     63

=Saura=, Bombay. 23N. 73E.                                    56

=Sauton=, Indo-China. 12N. 103E.                              71

=Sava=, Persia. 35N. 51E.                                     45

=Savalan Dagh=, Persia. 38N. 48E.                             47

=Savanur=, Bombay. 15N. 75E.                                  57

=Savarnadurg=, Bombay. 18N. 73E.                              57

=Saw=, Burma. 21N. 94E.                                       67

=Sawa=, Arabia. 16N. 47E.                                     44

=Sawal=, Java. 7S. 108E.                                      76

=Sawankalok=, Siam. 17N. 100E.                                70

=Sawant Wari=, Bombay. 16N. 74E.                              57

=Sawara=, Japan. 36N. 141E.                                   91

=Sawase-Muninto-shima=, Japan. 30N. 130E.                     89

=Sawu=, East Indies. 11S. 121E.                               74

=Sayer Island=, Malay Peninsula. 9N. 98E.                     71

=Scala Nova=, Asia Minor. 38N. 27E.                           46

=Schouten Island=, East Indies. 1S. 136E.                     75

=Schouten Island=, East Indies. 4S. 145E.                     75

=Scythopolis=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                           13

=Se Bang Fai R.=, Indo-China. 17N. 105E.                      70

=Se Bang Khan=, Indo-China. 13N. 106E.                        71

=Se Bang Hien=, Indo-China. 16N. 105E.                        70

=Sedili Besar=, Malay Peninsula. 2N. 104E.                    69

=Sefid=, Persia. 34N. 49E.                                    47

=Sefid Rud=, Persia. 37N. 50E.                                45

=Segaro=, Malacca Strait. 2N. 102E.                           69

=Sehaf River=, Baluchistan. 29N. 68E.                         59

=Seheh=, Malay Peninsula. 8N. 100E.                           71

=Sehwan=, Sind. 26N. 68E.                                     59

=Seira-kei River=, Formosa. 24N. 120E.                        89

=Seistan=, Persia. 30N. 61E.                                  45

=Seki=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                     91

=Sekiz=, Persia. 37N. 46E.                                    47

=Sekudi=, Malacca Strait. 1N. 102E.                           69

=Selangor=, Malay Peninsula. 3N. 101E.                        69

=Selangor River=, Malay Pen. 3N. 101E.                        69

=Selatan, Cape=, Borneo. 4S. 115E.                            76

=Selapum=, Siam. 16N. 104E.                                   70

[*]=Selefke=, Asia Minor. 36N. 34E.                           46

=Selenginsk=, Siberia. 50N. 107E.                             94

=Seleucia=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                              13

=Selin Kong Buyu=, Malay Pen. 7N. 102E.                       68

=Se Mam=, Siam. 15N. 105E.                                    70

=Semantan River=, Malay Pen. 3N. 102E.                        69

=Sembilan Island=, Malacca Str. 4N. 100E.                     68

=Semerara=, Philippine Islands. 12N. 122E.                    77

=Semeru, Mount=, Java. 8S. 113E.                              76

=Semipolatinsk=, Asiatic Russia. 51N. 80E.                    94

=Semiretchensk=, As. Russia. 45N. 78E.                        94

=Sempu=, Java. 8S. 113E.                                      76

=Senbo=, Burma. 25N. 97E.                                     67

=Sendai=, Japan. 38N. 141E.                                   88

=Sengora=, Malay Peninsula. 7N. 101E.                         71

=Senna=, Persia. 35N.                                         47

=Seoni=, Central Provinces. 22N. 80E.                         60

=Sepphoris=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                             13

=Sequevras Is.=, East Indies. 9N. 130E.                       75

=Serakhs=, Persia. 36N. 61E.                                  45

=Serang=, Java. 6S. 106E.                                     76

=Serangani Is.=, East Indies. 5N. 126E.                       75

=Seraor=, Bombay. 19N. 74E.                                   57

=Serau River=, Malay Peninsula. 4N. 102E.                     68

=Seremban=, Malay Peninsula. 3N. 102E.                        69

=Sergiopot=, Asiatic Russia. 48N. 80E.                        94

=Serindah=, Malay Peninsula. 3N. 102E.                        69

[*]=Seringapatam=, Mysore. 12N. 77E.                          63

=Sermatten=, East Indies. 8S. 129E.                           75

=Serpur=, Haidarabad. 20N. 80E.                               62

=Serua=, East Indies. 6S. 130E.                               75

=Se San=, Indo-China. 13N. 106E.                              71

=Se-su-phon=, Indo-China. 14N. 103E.                          71

=Setsu=, Japan. 35N. 135E.                                    91

=Setsu-san=, Formosa. 25N. 121E.                              89

=Sewasmudram=, Madras. 12N. 77E.                              63

=Seypan=, East Indies. 15N. 145E.                             75

=Shabeh Khel=, Punjab. 32N. 68E.                              58

=Shabkadar=, N.W. Frontier Prov. 34N. 72E.                    58

=Shadipalli=, Sind. 26N. 69E.                                 59

=Shaggera=, Arabia. 26N. 46E.                                 44

=Shahabad=, Haidarabad. 17N. 77E.                             62

=Shahabad=, Rajputana. 25N. 77E.                              59

[*]=Shahabad=, United Provinces. 28N. 80E.                    60

=Shah Bundur=, Sind. 24N. 68E.                                59

=Shahgarh=, Central Provs. 24N. 79E.                          60

=Shahgarh=, Rajputana. 27N. 70E.                              59

=Shahjahanpur=, United Provs. 28N. 80E.                       60

=Sha-ho=, China. 33N. 115E.                                   83

=Shaho=, Manchuria. 42N. 123E.                                90

=Shahpur=, Punjab. 32N. 72E.                                  58

=Shaikhawati=, Rajputana. 28N. 75E.                           59

=Shaikh Othman=, Arabia. 13N. 45E.                            44

=Shaiwal=, Punjab. 32N. 72E.                                  58

=Shalkar=, Punjab. 32N. 78E.                                  58

=Shan=, China. 35N. 111E.                                     82

=Shang=, China. 34N. 110E.                                    82

=Shang-cheng=, China. 32N. 115E.                              83

=Shang-hai=, China. 31N. 122E.                                83

[*]=Shang-hai=, China. 31N. 121E.                             85

=Shang-hang=, China. 25N. 117E.                               85

=Shang-sze=, China. 22N. 108E.                                84

=Shan-hai-kwan=, China. 40N. 120E.                            83

=Shankeridroog=, Madras. 12N. 78E.                            63

=Shan-si=, China. 38N. 113E. 82,                              83

=Shan States, North=, Burma. 22N. 98E.                        67

=Shan States, South=, Burma. 21N. 99E.                        67

=Shantarski Island=, Siberia. 55N. 138E.                      95

=Shan-tung=, China. 36N. 118E.                                83

=Shao-chau=, China. 25N. 113E.                                85

=Shao-hsing=, China. 30N. 121E.                               85

=Shao-wu=, China. 27N. 118E.                                  85

=Shara-khada=, China. 41N. 113E.                              82

=Shara-muren=, Mongolia. 44N. 120E.                           83

=Sharjah=, Arabia. 25N. 55E.                                  45

=Sharon, Plain of=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                      12

=Sha-shi=, China. 30N. 112E.                                  84

=Shatt el Arab=, Turkey in Asia. 31N. 48E.                    47

=Shau=, China. 32N. 117E.                                     83

=Shayok River=, Kashmir. 35N. 76E.                            58

=She=, China. 37N. 114E.                                      83

=Shechem=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                               12

=Sheiten=, Inner Mongolia. 41N. 109E.                         82

=Sheiten-ula=, Inner Mongolia. 41N. 109E.                     82

=Shekhabad=, Afghanistan. 34N. 69E.                           58

=Shemaga=, Burma. 22N. 96E.                                   67

=Shen=, China. 38N. 116E.                                     83

=Sheng=, China. 42N. 122E.                                    83

=Sheng-King=, Manchuria. 41N. 123E.                           90

=Shen-si=, China. 35N. 109E.                                  82

=Sheo=, Rajputana. 26N. 71E.                                  59

=Sheopur=, Central India. 26N. 77E.                           60

=Shergarh=, Punjab. 31N. 74E.                                 58

=Sherghaty=, Bengal. 25N. 85E.                                60

=Shibam=, Arabia. 16N. 49E.                                   44

=Shibata=, Japan. 38N. 139E.                                  91

=Shibetsu=, Japan. 43N. 145E.                                 88

=Shibushi=, Japan. 31N. 131E.                                 89

=Shi-chao=, China. 35N. 120E.                                 83

=Shi-cheng=, China. 26N. 116E.                                85

=Shichi To=, Japan. 34N. 139E.                                91

=Shi-chu=, China. 30N. 108E.                                  84

=Shie-tie-tien=, China. 39N. 119E.                            83

=Shigatze=, Tibet. 29N. 89E.                                  61

=Shikami=, Japan. 34N. 129E.                                  89

=Shikaripur=, Mysore. 14N. 75E.                               63

=Shikarpur=, Sind. 28N. 69E.                                  59

=Shikotsu-to=, Japan. 42N. 142E.                              88

=Shiljin-gol=, Mongolia. 44N. 116E.                           83

=Shilka, River=, Siberia. 54N. 121E.                          95

=Shillong=, Assam. 26N. 92E.                                  61

=Shiloh=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                12

=Shi-lung=, China. 23N. 114E.                                 85

=Shimabara=, Japan. 33N. 130E.                                89

=Shi-men=, China. 29N. 111E.                                  84

=Shimidsu=, Japan. 35N. 139E.                                 91

=Shimochuke=, Japan. 37N. 140E.                               91

[*]=Shimoga=, Mysore. 14N. 76E.                               63

[*]=Shimonosoki=, Japan. 34N. 131E.                           89

=Shimosa=, Japan. 36N. 140E.                                  91

=Shi-nan=, China. 30N. 109E.                                  84

=Shinano=, Japan. 36N. 138E.                                  91

=Shinchiku=, Formosa. 25N. 121E.                              89

=Shindwa=, Central India. 22N. 75E.                           56

=Shingu=, Japan. 34N. 136E.                                   91

=Shinjo=, Japan. 39N. 140E.                                   88

=Shin-mu=, China. 39N. 110E.                                  82

=Shin-san=, Japan. 40N. 140E.                                 88

=Shin Shima=, Japan. 34N. 139E.                               91

=Shiobado=, Tibet. 31N. 96E.                                  61

=Shi-pu=, China. 29N. 122E.                                   85

=Shirakawa=, Japan. 37N. 140E.                                91

[*]=Shiraz=, Persia. 30N. 53E.                                45

=Shiretokozaki=, Japan. 44N. 145E.                            88

=Shiri Bay=, Japan. 43N. 144E.                                88

=Shiriyazaki=, Japan. 41N. 142E.                              88

=Shiro=, Japan. 35N. 136E.                                    91

=Shi-shan=, China. 29N. 117E.                                 85

=Shi-tsien=, China. 27N. 108E.                                84

=Shi-tsui-tze=, China. 39N. 106E.                             82

=Shivarai Hills=, Madras. 12N. 78E.                           63

=Shiwo Cape=, Japan. 33N. 136E.                               91

=Shizuoka=, Japan. 35N. 138E.                                 91

=Shoal Gulf=, Korea. 36N. 126E.                               90

=Shoka=, Formosa. 24N. 121E.                                  89

[*]=Sholapur=, Bombay. 18N. 76E.                              57

=Shorapur=, Haidarabad. 17N. 77E.                             62

=Shorkot=, Punjab. 31N. 72E.                                  58

=Shozu South=, Japan. 35N. 134E.                              91

=Shuan-chen-tin=, Manchuria. 45N. 126E.                       90

=Shugshut=, Asia Minor. 40N. 30E.                             46

=Shu-ho=, China. 35N. 119E.                                   83

=Shu-ho=, China. 34N. 113E.                                   82

=Shui-chau=, China. 28N. 115E.                                85

=Shui-ho=, Inner Mongolia. 39N. 103E.                         82

=Shui-tung=, China. 21N. 111E.                                84

=Shu-kao=, China. 32N. 121E.                                  83

=Shun-chang=, China. 27N. 118E.                               85

=Shunem=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                                12

=Shung-pu=, China. 36N. 109E.                                 82

=Shu-ning=, China. 33N. 114E.                                 83

=Shun-king=, China. 31N. 106E.                                84

=Shun-te=, China. 37N. 115E.                                  83

=Shuram River=, Punjab. 32N. 69E.                             58

=Shuri=, Lu-Chu Island. 26N. 128E.                            89

=Shuster=, Persia. 32N. 49E.                                  47

[*]=Shwebo=, Burma. 23N. 96E.                                 67

=Shwegyin=, Burma. 18N. 97E.                                  67

=Shwe-in=, Burma. 25N. 97E.                                   67

=Siak=, East Indies. 1N. 102E.                                74

=Siak Sri Indrapura=, Sumatra. 1N. 102E.                      69

=Siak Koh=, Afghanistan. 34N. 64E.                            45

=Siak River=, Sumatra. 1N. 102E.                              69

=Sialkot=, Punjab. 33N. 75E.                                  58

=Siao=, East Indies. 3N. 125E.                                75

=Siao-ho=, China. 32N. 104E.                                  82

=Siargo=, Philippine Islands. 10N. 126E.                      77

=Siassi=, Philippine Islands. 5N. 121E.                       77

=Siaton Point=, Philippine Is. 9N. 123E.                      77

=Sibay=, Philippine Islands. 12N. 122E.                       77

=Siberui Island=, East Indies. 1S. 98E.                       74

=Sibi=, Punjab. 30N. 68E.                                     58

=Sibiriakof Island=, Siberia. 73N. 80E.                       94

=Siboga=, East Indies. 3N. 99E.                               74

=Siboku Island=, East Indies. 3S. 100E.                       74

=Sibsagar=, Assam. 27N. 95E.                                  67

=Sibuguey Bay=, Philippine Is. 7N. 122E.                      77

=Sibuyan=, Philippine Islands. 12N. 122E.                     77

=Sidavu=, Java. 7S. 113E.                                     76

=Sidoarjo=, Java. 7S. 113E.                                   76

[*]=Sidon=, Palestine. 34N. 35E.                              12

=Siempang=, Indo-China. 14N. 106E.                            70

=Siemreap=, Indo-China. 13N. 104E.                            71

=Sierra Madre=, Philippine Is. 17N. 122E.                     77

=Sifa, Cape=, China. 19N. 111E.                               84

=Sihoon River=, Asia Minor. 37N. 36E.                         46

=Sikanderabad=, Haidarabad. 17N. 78E.                         62

=Sikhota Alin Mts.=, Siberia. 46N. 136E.                      95

=Si-kiang River=, China. 22N. 108E.                           84

=Siktach=, Siberia. 69N. 124E.                                95

=Silaymyo=, Burma. 21N. 95E.                                  67

=Silchar=, Assam. 25N. 93E.                                   67

=Siller River=, Madras. 18N. 82E.                             62

=Silong Belamak B.=, Lombok. 9S. 116E.                        76

=Sim=, Siam. 19N. 101E.                                       70

=Simalur Island=, East Indies. 3N. 96E.                       74

[*]=Simla=, Punjab. 31N. 77E.                                 58

=Simoda=, Japan. 35N. 139E.                                   91

=Sinagawa=, Japan. 36N. 140E.                                 91

=Sinah River=, Bombay. 18N. 75E.                              57

=Sindang Barang=, Java. 8S. 107E.                             76

=Sindh River=, United Provs. 26N. 79E.                        60

=Sindjio=, Lu-Chu Islands. 24N. 123E.                         89

=Sindri=, Rajputana. 25N. 72E.                                59

[*]=Singapore=, Malay Peninsula. 1N. 104E.                    69

=Singapur=, Madras. 19N. 83E.                                 62

=Singaraji=, Bali. 8S. 115E.                                  76

=Singareni=, Haidarabad. 18N. 80E.                            62

=Singhjani=, Bengal. 25N. 90E.                                61

=Singhpur=, United Provs. 24N. 83E.                           60

=Singkawang=, East Indies. 1N. 109E.                          74

=Singkel=, East Indies. 3N. 98E.                              74

=Sinjai=, East Indies. 5S. 120E.                              74

=Sinjar, J.=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 41E.                       47

=Sin-min-fu=, Manchuria. 42N. 123E.                           90

=Sinocoan Mt.=, Philippine Is. 15N. 121E.                     77

[*]=Sinope=, Asia Minor. 42N. 35E.                            46

=Sipan Dagh=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 43E.                       47

=Sipiongot=, Sumatra. 2N. 100E.                               69

=Sipri=, Central India. 26N. 78E.                             60

=Siquijor=, Philippine Islands. 9N. 124E.                     77

=Sirahama=, Japan. 35N. 140E.                                 91

=Siran=, Sind. 24N. 68E.                                      59

=Sircilla=, Haidarabad. 18N. 79E.                             62

=Sirguja=, Bengal. 23N. 83E.                                  60

[*]=Sirhind=, Punjab. 31N. 76E.                               58

=Sir James Hall Is.=, Korea. 38N. 125E.                       90

=Sirmoor=, Punjab. 31N. 78E.                                  58

=Sirohi=, Rajputana. 25N. 73E.                                59

=Sironj=, Central India. 24N. 78E.                            60

=Sirpur=, Bombay. 21N. 75E.                                   56

=Sirsa=, Punjab. 29N. 75E.                                    59

=Sirt=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 42E.                             47

=Sirui, Cape=, Java. 8S. 112E.                                76

=Sis=, Asia Minor. 37N. 36E.                                  46

=Sisaket=, Siam. 15N. 104E.                                   70

=Sisarah=, Rajputana. 29N. 72E.                               59

=Sisuro Point=, Korea. 42N. 130E.                             90

=Sita River=, Punjab. 32N. 78E.                               58

=Sitapur=, United Provs. 28N. 81E.                            60

=Sittaung=, Burma. 17N. 97E.                                  67

=Sittaung River=, Burma. 17N. 97E.                            67

=Situbondo=, Java. 8S. 114E.                                  76

=Siu-ho River=, China. 29N. 116E.                             85

[*]=Sivas=, Asia Minor. 40N. 37E.                             46

=Sivrihissar=, Asia Minor. 39N. 32E.                          46

=Siwai Madhopur=, Rajputana. 26N. 76E.                        59

=Siwana=, Rajputana. 26N. 72E.                                59

=Skardo=, Kashmir. 35N. 76E.                                  58

[*]=Skutari=, Asia Minor. 41N. 29E.                           46

=Slamat Mountain=, Java. 7S. 109E.                            76

=Slim=, Malay Peninsula. 4N. 101E.                            69

=Sloko, Cape=, Java. 9S. 114E.                                76

[*]=Smyrna=, Asia Minor. 38N. 27E.                            46

=So-an Island=, Korea. 34N. 126E.                             90

=Society Bay=, China. 39N. 122E.                              83

=Socoh=, Palestine. 31N. 35E.                                 12

=Soe-trang=, Indo-China. 9N. 106E.                            71

=Sofask=, Siberia. 51N. 140E.                                 95

=Sohagpur=, Central Provinces. 23N. 78E.                      60

=Sohan River=, Punjab. 33N. 72E.                              58

[*]=Sohar=, Arabia. 24N. 57E.                                 45

=Sohnagpur=, Central India. 23N. 81E.                         60

=Sok=, Indo-China. 15N. 107E.                                 70

=Sokotai=, Siam. 17N. 100E.                                   70

=Solo River=, Java. 7S. 113E.                                 76

=Solombo Island=, East Indies. 5S. 114E.                      76

=Soma=, Asia Minor. 39N. 27E.                                 46

=Sombok=, Indo-China. 13N. 106E.                              71

[*]=Somnath=, Bombay. 21N. 70E.                               56

=Son=, Siam. 19N. 98E.                                        70

=Son=, Indo-China. 21N. 103E.                                 70

=Sonali Bazar=, Assam. 24N. 93E.                              67

=Sone River=, Bengal. 25N. 84E.                               60

=Sonehut=, Bengal. 23N. 82E.                                  60

=Song Bo=, Indo-China. 21N. 105E.                             70

=Song Chai=, Indo-China. 22N. 105E.                           70

=Song-chin=, Korea. 41N. 129E.                                90

=Song Ka=, Indo-China. 19N. 106E.                             70

=Songkla=, Malay Peninsula. 7N. 101E.                         71

=Song Koi=, Indo-China. 20N. 106E.                            70

=Song-kon=, Indo-China. 16N. 105E.                            70

=Songsan=, Burma. 27N. 97E.                                   67

=Sonipat=, Punjab. 29N. 77E.                                  59

=Son-la=, Indo-China. 21N. 104E.                              70

=Sonmiani=, Baluchistan. 25N. 67E.                            45

=Sonpur=, Central Provinces. 21N. 84E.                        60

=Son-tay=, Indo-China. 21N. 105E.                             70

=So-ping=, China. 40N. 112E.                                  82

=Sopur=, Kashmir. 34N. 74E.                                   58

=Soran=, United Provinces. 28N. 79E.                          60

=Sorol=, East Indies. 9N. 141E.                               75

=Sotina=, Siberia. 41N. 89E.                                  94

=Soukbulah=, Persia. 37N. 46E.                                47

=South Cape=, Bali. 9S. 115E.                                 76

=South Cape=, East Indies. 22N. 120E.                         74

=South Cape=, East Indies. 11S. 150E.                         75

=South-West Cape=, China. 19N. 109E.                          84

=Soya=, Japan. 45N. 142E.                                     88

=Soyazaki=, Japan. 45N. 142E.                                 88

=Spanish Island=, East Indies. 14N. 141E.                     75

=Sradet=, Indo-China. 13N. 108E.                              71

=Srepok=, Indo-China. 13N. 107E.                              71

=Sre-umbel=, Indo-China. 11N. 104E.                           71

=Srinagar=, Kashmir. 34N. 75E.                                58

=Srinagar=, United Provinces. 30N. 79E.                       60

=Srirangam=, Madras. 11N. 79E.                                63

=Sriwalliputur=, Madras. 10N. 79E.                            63

=Stanovoi, Mts.=, Siberia. 62N. 150E.                         95

=Stony Tunguska R.=, Siberia. 61N. 90E.                       94

=Strait of Singapore=, Malay Pen. 1N. 104E.                   69

=Strednoi Kolimsk=, Siberia. 67N. 158E.                       95

=Stung-Treng=, Indo-China. 13N. 106E.                         71

=Su=, China. 34N. 117E.                                       83

=Sual=, East Indies. 16N. 120E.                               74

=Sual=, Philippine Islands. 16N. 120E.                        77

=Subarmati River=, Bombay. 23N. 73E.                          56

=Suburga=, China. 44N. 122E.                                  83

=Subzavar=, Persia. 36N. 58E.                                 45

=Succoth=, Palestine. 32N. 36E.                               12

[*]=Su-chau=, China. 31N. 121E.                               83

=Suckling Mt.=, East Indies. 10S. 148E.                       75

=Sudharam=, Bengal. 23N. 91E.                                 61

=Sue-pau-ting=, China. 32N. 104E.                             82

=Sufi=, Sind. 26N. 70E.                                       59

=Sugakawa=, Japan. 37N. 140E.                                 91

=Sui=, China. 32N. 113E.                                      85

=Sui=, China. 35N. 115E.                                      83

=Sui-fu=, China. 29N. 105E.                                   84

=Sui-ki=, China. 21N. 110E.                                   84

=Sui-ngan=, China. 29N. 119E.                                 85

=Sui-ping=, China. 33N. 114E.                                 83

=Sui-te=, China. 37N. 110E.                                   82

=Sui-ting=, China. 31N. 108E.                                 84

=Sui-yuen-wan=, China. 41N. 112E.                             82

=Suji=, Inner Mongolia. 43N. 109E.                            82

=Sukadana=, East Indies. 1S. 110E.                            74

=Sukit=, Punjab. 32N. 77E.                                    58

[*]=Sukkur=, Sind. 28N. 69E.                                  59

=Sula Island=, East Indies. 3S. 125E.                         75

=Sulaiman Mts.=, Punjab. 30N. 70E.                            58

=Suleimamyeh=, Turkey in Asia. 36N. 46E.                      47

=Sullivan's Island=, Burma. 11N. 98E.                         71

=Sulphur Is.=, East Indies. 25N. 141E.                        75

=Sultameh=, Persia. 37N. 49E.                                 47

=Sultanpur=, Punjab. 32N. 77E.                                58

=Sulu Archipelago=, Philippine Is. 6N. 122E.                  77

=Sulu Island=, East Indies. 5N. 120E.                         74

=Sulu Sea=, East Indies. 8N. 120E.                            74

=Sulu Sea=, Philippine Islands. 8N. 120E.                     77

=Suma-khada Mts.=, China. 41N. 112E.                          82

=Sumatra=, East Indies. 0. 100E.                              74

=Sumba Island=, East Indies. 10S. 120E.                       74

=Sumbawa=, East Indies. 9S. 119E.                             74

=Sumbing, Mount=, Java. 7S. 110E.                             76

=Sumda=, Bombay. 15N. 75E.                                    57

=Sumenep=, Java. 7S. 114E.                                    76

=Sumoto=, Japan. 34N. 135E.                                   91

=Sunawaga=, Japan. 43N. 143E.                                 88

=Sunda, Strait of=, East Indies. 6S. 105E.                    74

=Sunderbuns=, Bengal. 22N. 89E.                               61

=Sungari River=, Manchuria. 45N. 125E.                        90

=Sungi Point=, Philippine Is. 11N. 126E.                      77

=Sungiori=, Madras. 15N. 80E.                                 62

=Sung-kiang=, China. 31N. 121E.                               83

=Sung-shan=, China. 35N. 113E. 82,                            83

=Sung-tao=, China. 28N. 109E.                                 84

=Sunites=, Inner Mongolia. 43N. 113E.                         82

=Sunkam=, Madras. 18N. 82E.                                   62

=Sunth=, Bombay. 23N. 74E.                                    56

=Suo=, Japan. 34N. 132E.                                      91

=Suo Nada Island=, Japan. 34N. 132E.                          89

=Su-pu=, China. 28N. 110E.                                    84

=Sur=, Arabia. 23N. 60E.                                      45

=Surabaya=, Java. 7S. 113E.                                   76

=Sura-buri=, Siam. 14N. 101E.                                 71

=Suradan=, Madras. 20N. 84E.                                  62

=Surakarta=, Java. 8S. 111E.                                  76

[*]=Surat=, Bombay. 21N. 73E.                                 56

=Suratgarh=, Rajputana. 29N. 74E.                             59

=Suren=, Siam. 15N. 103E.                                     71

=Sureydi=, Sind. 25N. 69E.                                    59

=Suri=, Bengal. 24N. 88E.                                     61

=Surigao=, Philippine Islands. 10N. 126E.                     77

=Surigao Strait=, Philippine Is. 10N. 126E.                   77

=Surkh Koh=, Afghanistan. 32N. 67E.                           58

=Suru=, Kashmir. 34N. 76E.                                    58

=Suruga=, Japan. 35N. 139E.                                   91

=Suruga Bay=, Japan. 35N. 139E.                               91

=Survasiddhi=, Madras. 17N. 83E.                              62

[*]=Susa=, Persia. 32N. 48E.                                  47

=Susah, Cape=, Sumatra. 2N. 101E.                             69

=Susaki=, Japan. 33N. 133E.                                   91

=Sutsu=, Japan. 42N. 140E.                                    88

=Suvanapum=, Siam. 16N. 104E.                                 70

=Suverek=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 39E.                          47

=Suzu Cape=, Japan. 37N. 137E.                                91

=Sverdrup Island=, Siberia. 74N. 80E.                         94

=Swat=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 35N. 73E.                        58

=Swat River=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 36N. 73E.                  58

=Swatow=, China. 23N. 117E.                                   85

=Swettenham, Pt.=, Malay Pen. 3N. 101E.                       69

=Sychar=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                13

=Sylhet=, Assam. 25N. 92E.                                    61

=Syloo=, Assam. 23N. 93E.                                     67

=Syme=, Asia Minor. 36N. 27E.                                 46

=Syrho Desert=, Inner Mongolia. 38N. 105E.                    82

=Syria=, Turkey in Asia. 35N. 37E.                            46

=Syrian Desert=, Syria and Arabia. 32N. 40E.                  44

=Sz=, China. 33N. 118E.                                       83

=Sze-chau=, China. 27N. 109E.                                 84

=Sze-cheng=, China. 24N. 106E.                                84

=Sze-chwan=, China. 30N. 105E.                                84

=Sze-nan=, China. 28N. 108E.                                  84

=Sze-ngen=, China. 23N. 108E.                                 84

=Sz-hwei=, China. 23N. 113E.                                  84


=Taal Vol.=, Philippine Islands. 14N. 122E.                   77

=Taanach=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                               12

=Tabanan=, Bali. 8S. 115E.                                    76

=Tabas=, Persia. 33N. 57E.                                    45

=Tabilung=, Sikkim. 27N. 89E.                                 61

=Tablas=, Philippine Islands. 13N. 122E.                      77

=Table Cape=, Indo-China. 10N. 105E.                          71

[*]=Tabor, Mount=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                       12

[*]=Tabreez=, Persia. 38N. 46E.                               47

=Tabub=, Arabia. 19N. 42E.                                    44

=Tachin=, Siam. 14N. 100E.                                    71

=Ta-chwang-ho=, Manchuria. 40N. 123E.                         90

=Tacloban=, Philippine Islands. 11N. 125E.                    77

=Tadmor=, Turkey in Asia. 34N. 38E.                           47

=Tadotsu=, Japan. 34N. 134E.                                  91

=Tadputri=, Madras. 15N. 78E.                                 62

=Taen Arynsk=, Siberia. 62N. 127E.                            95

=Tagan=, China. 33N. 104E.                                    82

=Tagaung-myo=, Burma. 23N. 96E.                               67

=Tagbilaran=, Philippine Is. 10N. 124E.                       77

=Tahkechi=, Malay Peninsula. 10N. 99E.                        71

=Tai=, China. 32N. 120E.                                      83

=Tai=, China. 39N. 113E.                                      82

=Tai-chau=, China. 29N. 121E.                                 85

=Tai-chau Bay=, China. 29N. 122E.                             85

=Tai-chau Island=, China. 28N. 122E.                          85

=Taichu=, Formosa. 24N. 121E.                                 89

=Tai-hang-shan=, China. 36N. 114E.                            83

=Tai-ho=, China. 27N. 115E.                                   85

=Tai-ho=, China. 33N. 116E.                                   83

=Taiho-ku=, Formosa. 25N. 121E.                               89

=Tai-hu=, China. 31N. 116E.                                   85

=Tai-hu=, China. 31N. 120E.                                   85

=Tai-jeng=, Korea. 33N. 126E.                                 90

=Tai-kang=, China. 34N. 115E.                                 83

=Taiko=, Formosa. 24N. 121E.                                  89

=Tai-ku=, Korea. 36N. 128E.                                   90

=Tai-kung=, China. 26N. 109E.                                 84

=Taimyr Bay=, Siberia. 75N. 98E.                              94

=Taimyr Island=, Siberia. 76N. 96E.                           94

=Taimyr Peninsula=, Siberia. 75N. 100E.                       94

=Tainan=, Formosa. 23N. 120E.                                 89

=Taindah=, Burma. 20N. 95E.                                   67

=Tai-ning=, China. 27N. 117E.                                 85

=Taio Cape=, Japan. 34N. 137E.                                91

=Tai-ping=, China. 22N. 107E.                                 84

=Tai-ping=, China. 28N. 121E.                                 85

=Tai-ping=, China. 32N. 119E.                                 83

=Taiping=, Malay Peninsula. 5N. 101E.                         68

=Taira=, Japan. 37N. 141E.                                    91

=Tais=, Arabia. 14N.                                          44

=Taitai=, East Indies. 11N. 119E.                             74

=Taiwan=, Formosa. 24N. 121E.                                 89

=Tai-yuen=, China. 38N. 112E.                                 82

=Tai-yuen-hsien=, China. 38N. 112E.                           82

=Tajima=, Japan. 35N. 135E.                                   91

=Taju=, Java. 6S. 111E.                                       76

=Takahagi=, Japan. 37N. 141E.                                 91

=Takahashi=, Japan. 35N. 134E.                                91

=Takamatsu=, Japan. 34N. 134E.                                91

=Takamatsu=, Japan. 37N. 137E.                                91

=Takanabe=, Japan. 32N. 132E.                                 89

=Takang=, Siam. 16N. 105E.                                    70

=Takao=, East Indies. 23N. 120E.                              74

=Takaoka=, Japan. 37N. 137E.                                  91

=Takara-shima=, Lu-Chu Is. 29N. 129E.                         89

=Takasaki=, Japan. 36N. 139E.                                 91

=Taka-shima=, Japan. 31N. 130E.                               89

=Takashima=, Japan. 36N. 138E.                                91

=Takata=, Japan. 34N. 136E.                                   91

=Takata=, Japan. 37N. 138E.                                   91

=Takayana=, Japan. 36N. 137E.                                 91

=Tak-chau Island=, Korea. 37N. 126E.                          90

=Takeo=, Japan. 36N. 136E.                                    91

=Taketoyo=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                 91

=Ta-kiang River=, China. 29N. 105E.                           84

=Takow=, Formosa. 22N. 120E.                                  89

=Takt-i-Suliman Mt.=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 32N. 70E.          58

=Ta-ku=, China. 27N. 106E.                                    84

=Ta-ku=, China. 39N. 118E.                                    83

=Takuatung=, Malay Peninsula. 8N. 99E.                        71

=Ta-ku-shan=, Manchuria. 40N. 124E.                           90

=Ta Kuwapa=, Malay Peninsula. 9N. 98E.                        71

=Takuyama=, Japan. 34N. 132E.                                 91

=Ta-kwan=, China. 28N. 104E.                                  84

=Talatcheri=, Madras. 12N. 75E.                               63

=Talaut Island=, East Indies. 4N. 132E.                       75

=Ta-lien-wan=, Manchuria. 39N. 122E.                          90

=Talikot=, Bombay. 16N. 76E.                                  57

=Ta-ling-ho=, China. 41N. 120E.                               83

=Talün-tün=, China. 42N. 116E.                                83

=Tamba=, Japan. 35N. 135E.                                    91

=Tambora, G. of=, East Indies. 8S. 118E.                      74

=Ta-ming=, China. 36N. 115E.                                  83

=Tammai=, Burma. 24N. 94E.                                    67

=Tampang=, East Indies. 1S. 114E.                             74

=Tampi=, Rajputana. 25N. 71E.                                 59

=Tampin Mt.=, Malay Peninsula. 2N. 102E.                      69

=Tamsui=, Formosa. 25N. 121E.                                 89

=Tamuntulang, C.=, Sumatra. 3N. 100E.                         69

=Tam-yang=, Korea. 35N. 127E.                                 90

=Tanabe=, Japan. 34N. 135E.                                   91

=Tanah=, Borneo. 3S. 116E.                                    76

=Tanah, Cape=, Java. 6S. 109E.                                76

=Tanah Merah=, Malay Pen. 6N. 102E.                           68

=Tanaka=, Japan. 35N. 138E.                                   91

=Ta-nan-hu=, China. 31N. 119E.                                85

=Tanaputi=, Sumatra. 2N. 101E.                                69

=Tan-chau=, China. 20N. 109E.                                 84

=Tandi=, Punjab. 33N. 77E.                                    58

=Tanegashima=, Japan. 31N. 131E.                              89

=Tanen Taung Gyi Mts.=, Burma. 21N. 99E.                      67

=Tang=, China. 23N. 111E.                                     84

=Tangalle=, Ceylon. 6N. 81E.                                  63

=Tango=, Japan. 36N. 135E.                                    91

=Tanguan, Cape=, Indo-China. 15N. 109E.                       71

=Ta-ning=, China. 31N. 110E.                                  84

=Tanjong Baley=, Sumatra. 3N. 100E.                           69

=Tanjong Gelang=, Malay Pen. 4N. 104E.                        68

=Tanjong Mas=, Malay Pen. 6N. 102E.                           68

=Tanjong Penunjut=, Malay Pen. 4N. 103E.                      68

=Tanjong Pinang=, Strait of Singapore. 1N. 104E.              69

=Tanjong Tohor=, Malay Pen. 2N. 103E.                         69

[*]=Tanjore=, Madras. 11N. 79E.                               63

=Tank=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 32N. 71E.                        58

=Tanon Strait=, Philippine Is. 10N. 123E.                     77

=Tantalam Island=, Malay Pen. 8N. 101E.                       71

=Tao-chau=, China. 26N. 112E.                                 84

=Tao-kau=, China. 36N. 115E.                                  83

=Tao-kwang=, Korea. 41N. 129E.                                90

=Tao-ping=, China. 24N. 117E.                                 85

=Tapah=, Malay Peninsula. 4N. 101E.                           68

=Tapapolon=, Siam. 18N. 98E.                                  70

=Ta-pa-shan=, China. 32N. 107E.                               82

=Ta-ping-ho River=, Burma. 24N. 97E.                          67

=Ta-ping-orr=, China. 43N. 121E.                              83

=Tapti River=, Bombay. 21N. 73E.                              56

=Ta-pu=, China. 24N. 117E.                                    85

=Tapul Island=, Philippine Is. 6N. 121E.                      77

=Tara=, Siberia. 57N. 74E.                                    94

=Tarama-shima=, Lu-Chu Is. 24N. 124E.                         89

=Tarang=, Malay Peninsula. 8N. 99E.                           71

=Tarapur=, Bombay. 20N. 73E.                                  57

=Tarbagatai Mts.=, Asiatic Russia. 47N. 82E.                  94

=Tarim=, Arabia. 16N. 49E.                                    44

=Tarmuth=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                               12

=Tarshis=, Persia. 35N. 59E.                                  45

=Tartary, Gulf of=, Siberia. 48N. 141E.                       95

=Ta-shang= or =Great Sandbank=, China. 34N. 122E.             83

=Ta-shi-kiau=, Manchuria. 41N. 122E.                          90

=Ta-shi-ki River=, China. 26N. 118E.                          85

=Ta-shi-shan=, China. 34N. 105E.                              82

=Tashkent=, Turkestan. 41N. 69E.                              45

=Tash Kopri=, Asia Minor. 42N. 34E.                           46

=Tashkurghan=, Afghanistan. 36N. 68E.                         45

=Tasp=, Baluchistan. 27N. 64E.                                45

=Tassiudon=, Bhutan. 28N. 90E.                                61

=Tatarsar=, Punjab. 30N. 74E.                                 58

=Tate Ya=, Japan. 37N. 138E.                                  91

=Ta-ting=, China. 27N. 106E.                                  84

=Ta-tong River=, Korea. 39N. 126E.                            90

=Ta-tsing-shan=, Inner Mongolia. 41N. 110E.                   82

=Ta-tsung-hu=, China. 33N. 120E.                              83

=Ta-tung=, China. 40N. 113E.                                  83

=Ta-tung-kau=, Manchuria. 40N. 124E.                          90

=Tatwas=, Rajputana. 27N. 73E.                                59

=Tau=, China. 35N. 103E.                                      82

=Taungdwing=, Burma. 20N. 96E.                                67

=Taung-gup Lake=, Burma. 19N. 95E.                            67

=Taung-gyi=, Burma. 21N. 97E.                                 67

=Taung-ngu=, Burma. 19N. 96E.                                 67

=Taun-gup=, Burma. 19N. 94E.                                  67

=Tau Passage=, Malay Pen. 10N. 100E.                          71

=Taurus Mts.=, Asia Minor. 36N. 30E.                          46

=Taurus Mts.=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 38E.                      46

=Tausk Bay=, Siberia. 59N. 149E.                              95

=Tavda, River=, Siberia. 58N. 67E.                            94

=Tavoy=, Burma. 14N. 98E.                                     71

=Tavoy Island=, Burma. 13N. 98E.                              71

=Tavoy Point=, Burma. 14N. 98E.                               71

=Tavoy River=, Burma. 14N. 98E.                               71

=Tawang=, Bhutan. 27N. 92E.                                   61

=Tawar, River=, Malay Pen. 7N. 101E.                          68

=Tawara=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                   91

=Tawi Tawi Is.=, Philippine Is. 5N. 120E.                     77

=Tayabas=, Philippine Islands. 14N. 122E.                     77

=Tayibeh=, Turkey in Asia. 35N. 39E.                          47

=Tay-ninh=, Indo-China. 11N. 106E.                            71

=Tayooka=, Japan. 36N. 135E.                                  91

=Ta-ye=, China. 30N. 115E.                                    85

=Taytay=, Philippine Islands. 11N. 119E.                      77

=Tchaoun Bay=, Siberia. 69N. 171E.                            95

=Tchaubar=, Persia. 25N. 61E.                                 45

=Tcheripaltcheri=, Madras. 11N. 76E.                          63

=Tchikisliar=, Turkestan. 38N. 54E.                           45

=Tchita=, Siberia. 52N. 114E.                                 95

=Tchorum=, Asia Minor. 40N. 35E.                              46

=Tchuktchees=, Siberia. 65N. 170E.                            95

=Tchumalari Mt.=, Tibet. 28N. 89E.                            61

=Tebbing Tinggi=, Malacca Str. 1N. 103E.                      69

=Tebuk=, Arabia. 29N. 37E.                                    44

=Te-chau=, China. 37N. 116E.                                  83

=Te-do=, Korea. 36N. 126E.                                    90

=Tefeni=, Asia Minor. 37N. 30E.                               46

=Tegal=, Java. 7S. 109E.                                      76

=Tehari=, Central India. 25N. 79E.                            60

[*]=Teheran=, Persia. 36N. 51E.                               45

=Teiku=, Burma. 18N. 97E.                                     67

[*]=Teima=, Arabia. 28N. 39E.                                 44

=Tejen River=, Turkestan. 36N. 61E.                           45

=Tek Myoo=, Burma. 20N. 93E.                                  61

=Tek Naff=, Burma. 21N. 92E.                                  61

=Tekoa=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                 12

[*]=Tekrit=, Turkey in Asia. 35N. 44E.                        47

=Tek-wen=, Korea. 39N. 127E.                                  90

=Tel River=, Central Provs. 21N. 84E.                         60

=Telek Lake=, Siberia. 52N. 87E.                              94

=Telgi=, Bombay. 17N. 76E.                                    57

=Telin=, Burma. 22N. 94E.                                     67

=Tell Ashtara=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                          12

=Telok Betong=, East Indies. 5S. 105E.                        74

=Telok Sera=, Malay Peninsula. 4N. 101E.                      68

=Teluk Anson=, Malay Peninsula. 4N. 101E.                     68

=Tembeling, South=, Malay Pen. 4N. 102E.                      68

=Tenasserim=, Burma. 12N. 99E.                                71

=Tenasserim Island=, Burma. 13N. 98E.                         71

=Tenedos=, Asia Minor. 40N. 26E.                              46

=Teng=, China. 33N. 112E.                                     82

=Teng=, China. 35N. 117E.                                     83

=Te-ngan=, China. 31N. 114E.                                  85

=Teng-chau=, China. 38N. 121E.                                83

=Tengiz, Lake=, Asiatic Russia. 46N. 75E.                     94

=Tengri Nor=, Tibet. 31N. 90E.                                61

=Tenimber Is.=, East Indies. 7S. 131E.                        75

=Tenkashi=, Madras. 9N. 77E.                                  63

=Tenom River=, Malay Pen. 4N. 102E.                           68

=Tenringawa=, Japan. 35N. 138E.                               91

=Teradomari=, Japan. 38N. 139E.                               91

=Terekli=, Asia Minor. 40N. 30E.                              46

=Ternate=, East Indies. 0. 127E.                              75

=Tersus=, Asia Minor. 37N. 35E.                               46

=Teshio=, Japan. 44N. 142E.                                   88

=Teshiogawa River=, Japan. 44N. 142E.                         88

=Teshiotake=, Japan. 43N. 143E.                               88

=Te-tsing=, China. 23N. 112E.                                 84

=Tetubin, River=, Malay Pen. 7N. 102E.                        68

=Teun=, Siam. 18N. 99E.                                       70

=Tezpur=, Assam. 27N. 93E.                                    61

=Thabyedaung=, Burma. 21N. 96E.                               67

=Tha-dua=, Indo-China. 19N. 102E.                             70

=Thagaya=, Burma. 19N. 96E.                                   67

=Thai-an=, Korea. 37N. 126E.                                  90

=Thai-binh=, Indo-China. 21N. 107E.                           70

=Thai-nguyen=, Indo-China. 22N. 106E.                         70

=Thairna River=, Haidarabad. 18N. 77E.                        62

=Thal=, Punjab. 30N. 69E.                                     58

=Thal=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 33N. 71E.                        58

=Thana=, Bombay. 19N. 73E.                                    57

=Than-Loa=, Indo-China. 20N. 106E.                            70

=Tharawadi=, Burma. 18N. 96E.                                 67

=Tharsuguda=, Bengal. 22N. 84E.                               60

=Thatha=, Sind. 25N. 68E.                                     59

=Thaton=, Burma. 17N. 98E.                                    67

=Thaungdut=, Burma. 24N. 95E.                                 67

=Thaungyin River=, Siam. 18N. 98E.                            70

=Thazi=, Burma. 21N. 96E.                                     67

=Thebez=, Palestine. 32N. 55E.                                12

=The-ling Mountain=, China. 25N. 113E.                        85

=Thepong=, Indo-China. 11N. 104E.                             71

=Thibaw=, Burma. 23N. 97E.                                    67

=Thithesar=, Punjab. 30N. 77E.                                58

=Thong-hoa=, Indo-China. 22N. 106E.                           70

=Thongwa=, Burma. 17N. 96E.                                   67

=Thousand Is.=, East Indies. 6S. 107E.                        76

=Thuan-an=, Indo-China. 17N. 108E.                            70

=Thuyetmago=, Burma. 19N. 95E.                                67

=Thuy-hoa=, Indo-China. 13N. 109E.                            71

=Tiamat=, Siam. 15N. 100E.                                    70

=Tibaw River=, Malay Pen. 7N. 101E.                           68

[*]=Tiberias=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                           13

=Ticao=, Philippine Islands. 13N. 123E.                       77

=Tie-ling=, Manchuria. 42N. 124E.                             90

=Tien-men=, China. 31N. 113E.                                 85

=Tien-pai=, China. 21N. 111E.                                 84

[*]=Tien-tsin=, China. 39N. 117E.                             83

=Tien-tuk=, Siam. 15N. 102E.                                  71

=Tien-yen=, Indo-China. 21N. 107E.                            70

=Tigel=, Siberia. 58N. 159E.                                  95

=Tiger Point=, Burma. 20N. 93E.                               67

=Tiger Point=, Indo-China. 11N. 108E.                         71

=Tigris River=, Turkey in Asia. 35N. 43E.                     47

=Timnath=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                               12

=Timor=, East Indies. 10S. 125E.                              75

=Timoraka=, East Indies. 5S. 137E.                            75

=Timor Laut, N.=, East Indies. 7S. 132E.                      75

=Timor Laut, S.=, East Indies. 8S. 132E.                      75

=Timor Sea=, East Indies. 12S. 121E.                          74

=Tinaca Point=, Philippine Is. 6N. 125E.                      77

=Tindivanum=, Madras. 12N. 80E.                               63

=Ting=, China. 38N. 115E.                                     83

=Ting-chau=, China. 26N. 117E.                                85

=Ting-fan=, China. 26N. 107E.                                 84

=Tinggi River=, Malay Pen. 3N. 101E.                          69

=Ting-hai=, China. 30N. 122E.                                 85

=Ting-nan=, China. 25N. 115E.                                 85

=Ting-ngan=, China. 20N. 110E.                                84

=Ting-yuen=, China. 24N. 113E.                                85

=Ting-yuen=, China. 32N. 108E.                                82

=Ting-yuen=, China. 33N. 117E.                                83

=Tinhosa Island=, China. 19N. 111E.                           84

=Tinian=, East Indies. 15N. 145E.                             75

=Tink-sai=, Indo-China. 20N. 106E.                            70

=Tinnevelli=, Madras. 9N. 78E.                                63

=Tipperah, Hill=, Bengal. 24N. 92E.                           61

=Tira=, Bombay. 23N. 69E.                                     56

=Tiravallur=, Madras. 11N. 80E.                               63

=Tirdall=, Bombay. 17N. 75E.                                  57

=Tireboli=, Asia Minor. 41N. 39E.                             47

=Tiri=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 33N. 71E.                        58

=Tirpetty=, Madras. 14N. 79E.                                 63

=Tirupattura=, Madras. 10N. 79E.                              63

=Tirzah=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                12

=Tista River=, Bengal. 26N. 90E.                              61

=Titabar=, Assam. 27N. 94E.                                   67

=Titalya=, Bengal. 27N. 88E.                                  61

=Ti-tao=, China. 35N. 104E.                                   82

=Toba=, Japan. 34N. 137E.                                     91

=Tobol, River=, Siberia. 58N. 68E.                            94

=Tobolsk=, Siberia. 58N. 68E.                                 94

=Tochi River=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 33N. 70E.                 58

=Tochigi=, Japan. 36N. 140E.                                  91

=Tohamy Lake=, Siberia. 55N. 77E.                             94

=Toizaki=, Japan. 31N. 131E.                                  89

=Tok=, Indo-China. 12N. 107E.                                 71

=Toka=, Haidarabad. 20N. 75E.                                 62

=Tokachi=, Japan. 42N. 144E.                                  88

=Tokachi=, Japan. 43N. 143E.                                  88

=Tokaido=, Japan. 36N. 139E.                                  91

=Tokamachi=, Japan. 37N. 139E.                                91

=Tokarak=, Punjab. 31N. 67E.                                  58

[*]=Tokat=, Asia Minor. 40N. 37E.                             46

[*]=Tokio=, Japan. 36N. 140E.                                 91

=Tokto=, China. 41N. 112E.                                    82

=Tokunoshima=, Lu-Chu Is. 28N. 129E.                          89

=Tokushima=, Japan. 34N. 135E.                                91

=Tolbatcha Volcano=, Siberia. 56N. 161E.                      95

=Tolon=, Philippine Islands. 9N. 123E.                        77

=To-lo-shan=, China. 36N. 120E.                               83

=Tolstonovskoye=, Siberia. 70N. 84E.                          94

=Tomakomai=, Japan. 42N. 142E.                                88

=Tomamai=, Japan. 44N. 142E.                                  88

=Tomari=, Japan. 41N. 141E.                                   88

=Tomari=, Japan. 43N. 145E.                                   88

=Tomigami, Cape=, Japan. 37N. 141E.                           91

=Tomini, Gulf of=, East Indies. 0. 121E.                      74

=Tomoh=, Malay Peninsula. 6N. 102E.                           68

=Tomori, Bay of=, East Indies. 2S. 122E.                      74

=Tom, River=, Siberia. 56N. 84E.                              94

[*]=Tomsk=, Siberia. 56N. 85E.                                94

=Tonashi=, Lu-Chu Islands. 26N. 127E.                         89

=Tondi=, Madras, 10N. 79E.                                    63

=Tong=, Burma. 21N. 100E.                                     67

=Tong-King=, Indo-China. 21N. 106E.                           70

=Tong-King, Gulf of=, Indo-China. 20N. 108E.                  70

=Tong-kou=, Inner Mongolia. 40N. 106E.                        82

=Tonk=, Rajputana. 26N. 76E.                                  59

=Tonle Sap=, Indo-China. 14N. 109E.                           71

=Tontoli=, East Indies. 1N. 121E.                             74

=Tonz Gol=, Asia Minor. 38N. 33E.                             46

=Tori-shima=, Lu-Chu Islands. 28N. 128E.                      89

=Torres Strait=, East Indies. 10S. 142E.                      75

=Tosa=, Japan. 34N. 133E.                                     91

=Tosa=, Japan. 34N. 134E.                                     91

=Tosa Bay=, Japan. 33N. 134E.                                 91

=Tosia=, Asia Minor. 41N. 34E.                                46

=Totomi=, Japan. 35N. 138E.                                   91

[*]=Tottori=, Japan. 36N. 134E.                               91

=Tourane=, Indo-China. 16N. 108E.                             70

=Tourane, Cape=, Indo-China. 16N. 108E.                       70

=Tou-tao-kou=, Manchuria. 43N. 127E.                          90

=Toyama=, Japan. 37N. 137E.                                   91

=Toyama Bay=, Japan. 37N. 137E.                               91

=Toyohashi=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                91

=Tran Ninh=, Indo-China. 19N. 103E.                           70

[*]=Tranquebar=, Madras. 11N. 80E.                            63

=Tras=, Malay Peninsula. 4N. 102E.                            69

=Travancore=, Madras. 9N. 77E.                                63

=Tre Island=, Indo-China. 12N. 109E.                          71

[*]=Trebizond=, Asia Minor. 41N. 40E.                         46

=Trenggalek=, Java. 8S. 111E.                                 76

=Trengganu=, Malay Peninsula. 5N. 103E.                       68

=Trengganu River=, Malay Pen. 5N. 103E.                       68

=Trenuduk, Gulf=, Malay Pen. 5N. 101E.                        68

=Triang River=, Malay Pen. 3N. 103E.                          69

=Trichindur=, Madras. 9N. 78E.                                63

[*]=Trichinopoli=, Madras. 11N. 79E.                          63

[*]=Trichoor=, Madras. 11N. 76E.                              63

[*]=Trincomali=, Ceylon. 9N. 81E.                             63

=Trivandrum=, Madras. 9N. 77E.                                63

=Trivellore=, Madras. 13N. 80E.                               63

=Trolak=, Malay Peninsula. 4N. 101E.                          68

=Tromelin=, East Indies. 10N. 141E.                           75

=Trouvers Island=, Java. 7S. 106E.                            76

=Truhawala=, Punjab. 29N. 72E.                                59

=Tsagan-chulutai=, Inner Mongolia. 41N. 111E.                 82

=Tsang=, China. 38N. 117E.                                    83

=Tsan-pu River=, Tibet. 29N. 92E.                             61

=Tsao-chau=, China. 35N. 116E.                                83

=Tsara Nor=, China. 43N. 121E.                                83

=Tse-chau=, China. 35N. 113E.                                 82

=Tsien-chow=, Indo-China. 19N. 106E.                          70

=Tsien-tang River=, China. 30N. 120E.                         85

=Tsi-lan-tai=, Inner Mongolia. 39N. 104E.                     82

=Tsi-mo=, China. 36N. 121E.                                   83

=Tsin=, China. 35N. 106E.                                     82

=Tsin=, China. 36N. 113E.                                     82

=Tsin=, China. 38N. 115E.                                     83

=Tsi-nan=, China. 37N. 117E.                                  83

=Tsing=, China. 26N. 110E.                                    84

=Tsing-chau=, China. 37N. 119E.                               83

=Tsing-hai=, China. 39N. 117E.                                83

=Tsing-hai Bay=, China. 37N. 122E.                            83

=Tsing-hwa=, China. 35N. 113E.                                83

=Tsing-kiang River=, China. 30N. 111E.                        84

=Tsing-lo=, China. 38N. 112E.                                 82

=Tsing-ning=, China. 35N. 106E.                               82

=Tsing-shan Mt.=, China. 25N. 117E.                           85

=Tsing-shui-ho=, China. 40N. 112E.                            82

[*]=Tsing-tao=, China. 36N. 120E.                             83

=Tsing-te=, China. 30N. 118E.                                 85

=Tsing-tien=, China. 28N. 120E.                               85

=Tsing-yuen=, China. 36N. 105E.                               82

=Tsin-ho River=, Indo-China. 22N. 105E.                       70

=Tsi-ning=, China. 35N. 117E.                                 83

=Tsin-kwang-tau=, China. 40N. 119E.                           83

=Tsin-ling-shan=, China. 34N. 107E.                           82

=Tsin-ngan=, China. 35N. 106E.                                82

=Tsin-peng=, Mongolia. 43N. 117E.                             83

=Tsin-shan=, China. 35N. 120E.                                83

=Tsong-siong=, Korea. 43N. 130E.                              90

=Tsu=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                      91

=Tsubu-Shoto Is.=, Lu-Chu Is. 26N. 129E.                      89

=Tsuchiura=, Japan. 36N. 140E.                                91

=Tsuchizaki=, Japan. 40N. 140E.                               88

=Tsuen-chau=, China. 26N. 111E.                               84

=Tsuen-chau=, China. 23N. 119E.                               85

=Tsuen-chau Bay=, China. 25N. 119E.                           85

=Tsugaru Strait=, Japan. 41N. 141E.                           88

=Tsun=, Manchuria. 46N. 126E.                                 90

=Tsun-feng-shan Mt.=, China. 27N. 116E.                       85

=Tsung-ngan=, China. 28N. 118E.                               85

=Tsun-hwa=, China. 40N. 118E.                                 83

=Tsun-i=, China. 28N. 107E.                                   84

=Tsuruga=, Japan. 36N. 136E.                                  91

=Tsurugaoka=, Japan. 39N. 140E.                               88

=Tsushima=, Japan. 34N. 130E.                                 89

=Tsuwano=, Japan. 35N. 132E.                                  91

=Tsuyama=, Japan. 35N. 134E.                                  91

=Tswan=, China. 37N. 108E.                                    82

=Tsz=, China. 30N. 105E.                                      84

=Tsz-kiang River=, China. 28N. 112E.                          84

=Tsz-li=, China. 29N. 111E.                                   84

=Tsz-pai-shan=, China. 33N. 106E.                             82

=Tuanico Strait=, Philippine Is. 11N. 125E.                   77

=Tuban=, Java. 7S. 112E.                                      76

=Tu-chang=, China. 29N. 116E.                                 85

=Tu-fu=, China. 24N. 106E.                                    84

=Tuguegarao=, Philippine Is. 18N. 122E.                       77

=Tuhana=, Punjab. 30N. 76E.                                   58

=Tulsipur=, United Provinces. 28N. 82E.                       60

=Tumen-ula=, Manchuria. 42N. 131E.                            90

=Tumkur=, Mysore. 13N. 77E.                                   63

=Tun=, Persia. 34N. 58E.                                      45

=Tuna=, Bombay. 23N. 70E.                                     56

=Tundra=, Siberia. 71N. 145E.                                 95

=Tung=, China. 32N. 121E.                                     83

=Tung=, China. 40N. 117E.                                     83

=Tungabudra=, Madras. 16N. 78E.                               62

=Tung-chang=, China. 36N. 116E.                               83

=Tung-chau=, China. 35N. 110E.                                82

=Tung-cheng=, China. 31N. 117E.                               85

=Tung-chuan=, China. 26N. 104E.                               84

=Tung-chwan=, China. 31N. 105E.                               84

=Tung-hai Island=, China. 21N. 110E.                          84

=Tung-hsiagn=, China. 31N. 108E.                              84

=Tung-hwa=, Manchuria. 42N. 126E.                             90

=Tung-hwa Island=, China. 22N. 113E.                          85

=Tung-kiang=, China. 32N. 107E.                               84

=Tung-kiang River=, China. 23N. 114E.                         85

=Tungkiangtze=, Manchuria. 43N. 123E.                         90

=Tung-king-cheng=, Manchuria. 44N. 129E.                      90

=Tung-kwan=, China. 23N. 114E.                                85

=Tung-kwan=, China. 35N. 109E.                                82

=Tung-kwan=, China. 35N. 110E.                                82

=Tung-ngan=, China. 25N. 119E.                                85

=Tung-ngan Bay=, China. 23N. 116E.                            85

=Tung-ping=, China. 36N. 117E.                                83

=Tung-shan=, China. 24N. 118E.                                85

=Tung-tai=, China. 33N. 120E.                                 83

=Tung-tao=, China. 26N. 110E.                                 84

=Tung-ting-hu=, China. 29N. 113E.                             85

=Tunguska River, Lower=, Siberia. 64N. 88E.                   94

=Tunguska River, Upper=, Siberia. 58N.                        94

=Tung-wei=, China. 35N. 105E.                                 82

=Tung-wen-ho=, China. 35N. 118E.                              83

=Tung-yang=, China. 29N. 120E.                                85

=Tung-yen=, China. 27N. 109E.                                 84

=Tuni=, Madras. 17N. 83E.                                     62

=Tunjong Bulus=, Malay Pen. 1N. 103E.                         69

=Turakom=, Indo-China. 18N. 103E.                             70

=Turcomans=, Turkestan. 40N. 58E.                             45

=Turinsk=, Siberia. 58N. 64E.                                 94

=Turukhansk=, Siberia. 67N. 96E.                              94

=Tu-shan=, China. 26N. 108E.                                  84

=Tu-shi-kan=, China. 41N. 116E.                               83

=Tuss-gong=, Bhutan. 27N. 92E.                                61

=Tuticorin=, Madras. 9N. 78E.                                 63

=Tuyen-quang=, Indo-China. 22N. 105E.                         70

=Tu-yun=, China. 26N. 107E.                                   84

=Tuzu River=, Burma. 26N. 95E.                                67

=Tyngeri=, Inner Mongolia. 38N. 104E.                         82

=Tyre=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                                  12

=Tyria=, Asia Minor. 38N. 27E.                                46


=Ua=, Indo-China. 22N. 102E.                                  70

=Ubon=, Siam. 15N. 105E.                                      70

=Uchi Shima=, Japan. 38N. 137E.                               91

=Uchur River=, Siberia. 59N. 130E.                            95

=Udaipur=, Bengal. 23N. 83E.                                  60

=Udaipur=, Rajputana. 25N. 74E.                               59

=Udajagiri=, Madras. 15N. 79E.                                62

=Ude=, Inner Mongolia. 44N. 111E.                             82

=Udgir=, Haidarabad. 18N. 77E.                                62

=Udinsk Bay=, Siberia. 58N. 164E.                             95

=Udka Kot=, Punjab. 30N. 71E.                                 58

=Udong=, Indo-China. 12N. 105E.                               71

=Udskoi=, Siberia. 55N. 135E.                                 95

=Uga=, Japan. 35N. 136E.                                      91

=Uji-shima=, Japan. 31N. 130E.                                89

=Uke Island=, Lu-Chu Islands. 28N. 129E.                      89

=Ukushima=, Japan. 33N. 129E.                                 89

=Ulan-muren=, Inner Mongolia. 39N. 110E.                      82

=Ulithi=, East Indies. 10N. 140E.                             75

=Ulugan Bay=, Philippine Is. 10N. 118E.                       77

[*]=Umarkot=, Sind. 25N. 70E.                                 59

=Umasi Pass=, Kashmir. 33N. 76E.                              58

=Umboi Island=, East Indies. 6S. 147E.                        75

=Umenia=, Central India. 23N. 81E.                            60

=Uniut=, China. 43N. 119E.                                    83

=Unjunwell=, Bombay. 18N. 73E.                                57

=Unkovsky Bay=, Korea. 36N. 129E.                             90

=Uotsu=, Japan. 37N. 137E.                                    91

=Uraccas=, East Indies. 20N. 145E.                            75

=Urai=, United Provinces. 26N. 79E.                           60

=Urakawa=, Japan. 42N. 143E.                                  88

=Urawa=, Japan. 36N. 140E.                                    91

=Urdaneta Mt.=, Philippine Is. 9N. 124E.                      77

=Urfah=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 39E.                            47

=Urot=, Inner Mongolia. 42N. 108E.                            82

[*]=Urumiyah=, Persia. 37N. 45E.                              47

=Urumiyah Lake=, Persia. 38N. 46E.                            47

=Uska Bazar=, United Provs. 27N. 83E.                         60

=Ust Kamenogorsk=, Asiatic Russia. 50N. 83E.                  94

=Ust Strelka=, Siberia. 52N. 121E.                            95

=Usun-ada=, Turkestan. 40N. 53E.                              45

=Usu-to Island=, Japan. 42N. 141E.                            88

[*]=Utakamand=, Madras. 11N. 77E.                             63

=Utalan=, Haidarabad. 18N. 78E.                               62

=Utampolliam=, Madras. 10N. 77E.                              63

=Utaradit=, Siam. 18N. 100E.                                  70

=Utch=, Punjab. 31N. 72E.                                     58

=Utch=, Punjab. 29N. 71E.                                     59

=Uthen=, Siam. 17N. 104E.                                     70

=Utran=, Bombay. 21N. 75E.                                    56

=Uttelli=, Madras. 17N. 82E.                                  62

=Utum=, Indo-China. 14N. 106E.                                71

=Uyeda=, Japan. 36N. 138E.                                    91

=Uyeno=, Japan. 35N. 136E.                                    91

=U-yu River=, Burma. 25N. 95E.                                67


=Vaddadi=, Madras. 18N. 83E.                                  62

=Vaico River, E.=, Indo-China. 11N. 107E.                     71

=Vaico River, W.=, Indo-China. 11N. 107E.                     71

[*]=Van=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 43E.                           47

=Van Diemen Strait=, Japan. 31N. 131E.                        89

=Vang=, Indo-China. 17N. 106E.                                70

=Van Lake=, Turkey in Asia. 39N. 42E.                         47

=Varela, Cape=, Indo-China. 13N. 109E.                        71

=Va Semeru=, East Indies. 8S. 112E.                           74

=Vasrai=, Bombay. 21N. 73E.                                   56

=Veh=, Indo-China. 16N. 107E.                                 70

[*]=Vellore=, Madras. 13N. 79E.                               63

=Verkhoiansk=, Siberia. 67N. 133E.                            95

=Verkhoiansk Mts.=, Siberia. 65N. 132E.                       95

=Verknoi Kamtchatsk=, Siberia. 55N. 159E.                     95

=Verknoi Kolimsk=, Siberia. 66N. 155E.                        95

=Vernoi Udinsk=, Siberia. 50N. 108E.                          94

=Victoria=, China. 22N. 114E.                                 85

=Victoria Bay=, Siberia. 44N. 133E.                           95

=Victoria, Fort=, Bombay. 18N. 73E.                           57

=Victoria Peak=, Philippine Is. 9N. 118E.                     77

=Vigan=, Philippine Islands. 18N. 121E.                       77

=Vigay River=, Madras. 9N. 79E.                               63

=Vijapur=, Bombay. 24N. 73E.                                  56

=Vijayadurg=, Bombay. 16N. 73E.                               57

=Vilioni, River=, Siberia. 64N. 124E.                         95

=Viliusk=, Siberia. 64N. 121E.                                95

=Vilkitsk Island=, Siberia. 73N. 76E.                         94

=Villupuram=, Madras. 12N. 80E.                               63

=Vincennes Strait=, Japan. 30N. 131E.                         89

=Vingoorla=, Bombay. 16N. 74E.                                57

=Vinh=, Indo-China. 19N. 106E.                                70

=Vinhlong=, Indo-China. 10N. 106E.                            71

=Vipar River=, Madras. 9N. 78E.                               63

=Viramgam=, Bombay. 23N. 72E.                                 56

=Virawow=, Sind. 24N. 71E.                                    59

=Visayas=, Philippine Islands. 12N. 123E.                     77

=Vitim, River.=, Siberia. 57N. 114E.                          95

=Vitimsk=, Siberia. 60N. 113E.                                94

=Vizagapatam=, Madras. 17N. 83E.                              62

=Vizianagram=, Madras. 18N. 83E.                              62

[*]=Vladivostok=, Siberia. 43N. 132E.                         95

=Volcano Bay=, Japan. 42N. 141E.                              88

=Volcano Island=, East Indies. 25N. 141E.                     75

=Vuirawull=, Bombay. 21N. 70E.                                56

=Vukada=, Japan. 37N. 141E.                                   91

=Vung Chua, C.=, Indo-China. 18N. 107E.                       70


=Wadayama=, Japan. 35N. 135E.                                 91

=Wadhwan=, Bombay. 23N. 72E.                                  56

=Wadi=, Haidarabad. 17N. 77E.                                 62

=Wadnagar=, Bombay. 24N. 73E.                                 56

=Wadomari Is.=, Lu-Chu Is. 28N. 129E.                         89

=Wady Dauasir=, Arabia. 20N. 45E.                             44

=Wai=, Bombay. 18N. 74E.                                      57

=Waigeu Island=, East Indies. 0. 131E.                        75

=Waingapu=, East Indies. 10S. 120E.                           74

=Wajima=, Japan. 37N. 137E.                                   91

=Wakamatsu=, Japan. 38N. 140E.                                91

=Wakasa=, Japan. 36N. 136E.                                   91

=Wakasa Bay=, Japan. 36N. 136E.                               91

[*]=Wakayama=, Japan. 34N. 135E.                              91

=Wakhan=, Central Asia. 37N. 74E.                             45

=Wakkanai=, Japan. 45N. 142E.                                 88

=Walckenaer Bay=, East Indies. 2S. 140E.                      75

=Walfish Bay=, Japan. 43N. 145E.                              88

=Waltair=, Madras. 18N. 83E.                                  62

=Wana=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 32N. 69E.                        58

=Wang=, Inner Mongolia. 40N. 110E.                            82

=Wanga Bazar=, Sind. 24N. 69E.                                59

=Wang-je-fu=, Inner Mongolia. 39N. 105E.                      82

=Wan-hien=, China. 31N. 108E.                                 84

=Wankanir=, Bombay. 23N. 71E.                                 56

=Warangul=, Haidarabad. 18N. 80E.                             62

=Wardha=, Central Provinces. 21N. 79E.                        60

=Warora=, Central Provinces. 20N. 79E.                        60

=Washington Gulf=, Korea. 34N. 126E.                          90

=Wazirabad=, Punjab. 32N. 74E.                                58

=Waziristan=, N.W. Frontier Provs. 33N. 70E.                  58

=Weda=, East Indies. 0. 127E.                                 75

=Wei=, China. 37N. 119E.                                      83

=Wei-chang=, China. 42N. 117E.                                83

[*]=Wei-hai-wei=, China. 37N. 122E.                           83

=Wei-ho=, China. 34N. 105E.                                   82

=Wei-ho=, China. 35N. 105E.                                   82

=Wei-ho=, China. 38N. 117E.                                   83

=Wei-hwei=, China. 35N. 114E.                                 83

=Wei-ning=, China. 27N. 105E.                                 84

=Welcome Bay=, Java. 7S. 105E.                                76

=Weld, Pt.=, Malay Peninsula. 5N. 101E.                       68

=Wellesley=, Malay Peninsula. 5N. 100E.                       68

=Wen-chau=, China. 28N. 121E.                                 85

=Wen-chau Bay=, China. 28N. 121E.                             85

=Wen-hs=, China. 33N. 104E.                                   82

=Wen-ju=, Korea. 37N. 128E.                                   90

=Wensan=, Korea. 39N. 127E.                                   90

=Wen-teng=, China. 37N. 122E.                                 83

=Werdi=, Turkey in Asia. 34N. 41E.                            47

=West River=, China. 23N. 111E.                               84

=Wetter=, East Indies. 8S. 126E.                              75

=White, Fort=, Burma. 23N. 94E.                               67

=White Island=, Siberia. 73N. 71E.                            94

=Widjowa=, Rajputana. 25N. 73E.                               59

=Wiernoie=, Asiatic Russia. 44N. 78E.                         94

[*]=Wi-ju=, Korea. 40N. 125E.                                 90

=Wolia=, East Indies. 7N. 144E.                               75

=Wonosari=, Java. 8S. 111E.                                   76

=Woon Shan=, China. 28N. 118E.                                85

=Wowrie=, Sind. 25N. 70E.                                     59

=Wrangell Island=, Siberia. 71N. 179E.                        95

=Wu-chau=, China. 23N. 111E.                                  84

[*]=Wu-chang=, China. 30N. 114E.                              85

=Wu-chi-shan=, China. 19N. 110E.                              84

=Wu-chwan=, China. 21N. 111E.                                 84

=Wu-chwan=, China. 28N. 108E.                                 84

=Wu-hi-shan=, China. 36N. 111E.                               82

=Wu-hu=, China. 31N. 118E.                                    85

=Wu-kang=, China. 27N. 111E.                                  84

=Wu-kan-ling=, China. 27N. 114E.                              85

=Wu-kiang River=, China. 27N. 108E.                           84

=Wu-la-ho=, Inner Mongolia. 41N. 107E.                        82

=Wulitun=, Manchuria. 42N. 124E.                              90

=Wulur Lake=, Kashmir. 34N. 75E.                              58

=Wun=, Berar. 20N. 79E.                                       60

=Wu-ni-kiang River=, China. 24N. 109E.                        84

=Wu-ning=, China. 29N. 115E.                                  85

=Wuntho=, Burma. 24N. 96E.                                    67

=Wu-ping=, China. 25N. 116E.                                  85

=Wurdha River=, Berar. 20N. 79E.                              60

=Wu-shan=, China. 31N. 111E.                                  84

=Wu-shin=, Inner Mongolia. 39N. 109E.                         82

=Wu-sueh=, China. 30N. 116E.                                  85

=Wu-sung=, China. 32N. 121E.                                  85

=Wu-tai=, China. 39N. 113E.                                   83

=Wu-tai-shan=, China. 39N. 114E.                              83

=Wu-ting=, China. 38N. 118E.                                  83

=Wu-ting-ho=, China. 38N. 109E.                               82

=Wu-yi-shan=, China. 28N. 118E.                               85

=Wu-yuen=, China. 23N. 108E.                                  84

=Wynkoops Bay=, Java. 7S. 106E.                               76


=Xuan-Dai=, Indo-China. 13N. 109E.                            71

=Xuan-Dai Bay=, Indo-China. 13N. 109E.                        71


=Yabari=, Japan. 42N. 142E.                                   88

=Yablonoi Mts.=, Siberia. 52N. 112E.                          94

=Yai-chau=, China. 19N. 109E.                                 84

=Yakan, Cape=, Siberia. 70N. 178E.                            95

=Yakushima=, Japan. 30N. 131E.                                89

[*]=Yakutsk=, Siberia. 62N. 130E.                             95

=Yalkundapuram=, Madras. 11N. 79E.                            63

=Yalmal Peninsula=, Siberia. 70N. 70E.                        94

[*]=Yalu River=, Korea. 40N. 125E.                            90

=Yama=, Japan. 35N. 136E.                                     91

=Yamada=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                   91

=Yamagata=, Japan. 38N. 141E.                                 88

[*]=Yamaguchi=, Japan. 34N. 131E.                             89

=Yamato=, Japan. 34N. 136E.                                   91

=Yamethin=, Burma. 20N. 96E.                                  67

=Yana, River=, Siberia. 71N. 135E.                            95

=Yanaon=, Madras. 17N. 82E.                                   62

[*]=Yanbo=, Arabia. 24N. 38E.                                 44

=Yang=, China. 25N. 113E.                                     85

=Yang-chau=, China. 32N. 119E.                                83

=Yang-ju=, Korea. 38N. 127E.                                  90

=Yang-kao=, China. 40N. 114E.                                 83

=Yang-kiang=, China. 22N. 112E.                               84

=Yang-sho=, China. 24N. 111E.                                 84

=Yang-yang=, Korea. 38N. 128E.                                90

=Yao=, China. 35N. 109E.                                      82

=Yao=, Japan. 35N. 136E.                                      91

=Yap=, East Indies. 10N. 137E.                                75

=Yari-ga Te=, Japan. 36N. 138E.                               91

=Yarmuk, River=, Palestine. 33N. 36E.                         12

=Yasen Cape=, Asia Minor. 41N. 38E.                           47

=Yashiro, South=, Japan. 34N. 132E.                           91

=Yatsauk=, Burma. 21N. 97E.                                   67

=Yatsugataka=, Japan. 36N. 138E.                              91

=Yatsukota=, Japan. 41N. 141E.                                88

=Yatsushiro=, Japan. 32N. 131E.                               89

=Yawata=, Japan. 35N. 140E.                                   91

=Yawata=, Japan. 36N. 137E.                                   91

=Yayeyama Is.=, Lu-Chu Is. 24N. 126E.                         89

=Yazaki=, Japan. 38N. 138E.                                   88

=Ye-ju=, Korea. 37N. 127E.                                    90

=Yellandu=, Haidarabad. 18N. 80E.                             62

=Yenama=, Burma. 20N. 95E.                                    67

=Yenangyaung=, Burma. 21N. 95E.                               67

=Yen-bai=, Indo-China. 21N. 105E.                             70

=Yen-chang=, China. 37N. 109E.                                82

=Yen-chau=, China. 30N. 119E.                                 85

=Yen-chau=, China. 36N. 117E.                                 83

=Yeng-chen=, Korea. 40N. 125E.                                90

=Yeng-hai=, Korea. 37N. 129E.                                 90

=Yeng-heung=, Korea. 40N. 127E.                               90

=Yeng-pyen=, Korea. 40N. 126E.                                90

=Yenisei, River=, Siberia. 69N. 87E.                          94

=Yeniseisk=, Siberia. 59N. 92E.                               94

=Yen-ngan=, China. 37N. 109E.                                 82

=Yen-ping=, China. 26N. 118E.                                 85

=Yen-shan=, China. 38N. 117E.                                 83

=Yen-shui=, China. 37N. 110E.                                 82

=Yentai Mines=, Manchuria. 41N. 123E.                         90

=Yen-tsin=, China. 31N. 110E.                                 84

=Yeotmal=, Berar. 20N. 78E.                                   60

=Yeotrup Minbya=, Burma. 20N. 93E.                            67

=Yerimozaki=, Japan. 42N. 143E.                               88

=Yero=, Lu-Chu Islands. 28N. 129E.                            89

=Yeshida=, Japan. 33N. 133E.                                  91

=Yeshil Irmak R.=, Asia Minor. 41N. 37E.                      46

=Yesvantpur=, Mysore. 13N. 77E.                               63

=Yeu=, Burma. 23N. 95E.                                       67

=Yey=, Burma. 15N. 98E.                                       67

=Yezd=, Persia. 32N. 53E.                                     45

=Yezo=, Japan. 43N. 143E.                                     88

=Yezo Strait=, Japan. 43N. 145E.                              88

=Yi=, China. 30N. 118E.                                       85

=Yi=, China. 39N. 115E.                                       83

=Ying=, China. 40N. 113E.                                     83

=Ying-chau=, China. 33N. 116E.                                83

=Ying-kou=, Manchuria. 41N. 122E.                             90

=Ying-pan-shima=, China. 37N. 104E.                           82

=Ying-shang=, China. 31N. 116E.                               85

=Ying-yu-men=, China. 35N. 120E.                              83

=Yin-te=, China. 24N. 113E.                                   85

=Yi-wan Bay=, China. 28N. 121E.                               85

=Yi-yang=, China. 28N. 112E.                                  84

=Yi-yang=, China. 28N. 118E.                                  85

=Yo-chau=, China. 29N. 113E.                                  85

=Yokasuka=, Japan. 35N. 140E.                                 91

=Yokkaichi=, Japan. 35N. 137E.                                91

=Yokoate-shima=, Lu-Chu Is. 29N. 129E.                        89

[*]=Yokohama=, Japan. 35N. 140E.                              91

=Yokosuka=, Japan. 35N. 138E.                                 91

=Yokote=, Japan. 39N. 141E.                                   88

=Yolo Island=, Philippine Is. 6N. 121E.                       77

=Yonakuni-shima=, Lu-Chu Is. 24N. 123E.                       89

=Yoneko=, Japan. 35N. 133E.                                   91

=Yonezawa=, Japan. 38N. 140E.                                 91

=Yoron-shima=, Lu-Chu Is. 27N. 129E.                          89

=Yoshinogawa=, Japan. 34N. 134E.                              91

=Yu=, China. 27N. 113E.                                       85

=Yu=, China. 40N. 115E.                                       83

=Yu-chau=, China. 33N. 113E.                                  82

=Yu-chou Peninsula=, China. 35N. 120E.                        83

=Yuen-chau=, China. 27N. 109E.                                84

=Yuen-chau=, China. 28N. 114E.                                85

=Yuen-kiang River=, China. 28N. 111E.                         84

=Yuen-ku=, China. 35N. 112E.                                  82

=Yu-ho River=, China. 28N. 116E.                              85

=Yu-hwan-shan=, China. 28N. 121E.                             85

=Yu-kan=, China. 28N. 117E.                                   85

=Yu-kiang River=, China. 23N. 107E.                           84

=Yule Mountain=, East Indies. 8S. 148E.                       75

=Yu-lin=, China. 22N. 110E.                                   84

=Yu-lin=, China. 38N. 109E.                                   82

=Yu-lin-kan Bay=, China. 18N. 110E.                           84

=Yun=, China. 26N. 104E.                                      84

=Yun-chung-shima=, China. 39N. 112E.                          82

=Yun-luen=, China. 28N. 104E.                                 84

=Yung=, China. 23N. 110E.                                     84

=Yung=, China. 30N. 104E.                                     84

=Yung-cha=, China. 26N. 112E.                                 84

=Yung-cheng=, China. 37N. 123E.                               83

=Yung-chun=, China. 25N. 118E.                                85

=Yung-ho=, China. 35N. 110E.                                  82

=Yung-ngan=, China. 24N. 111E.                                84

=Yung-ning=, China. 25N. 110E.                                84

=Yung-ning=, China. 26N. 106E.                                84

=Yung-ning=, China. 34N. 112E.                                82

=Yung-ning=, China. 37N. 111E.                                82

=Yung-ping=, China. 40N. 119E.                                83

=Yung-shan=, China. 28N. 104E.                                84

=Yung-shun=, China. 29N. 110E.                                84

=Yung-sui=, China. 28N. 109E.                                 84

=Yun-ho=, China. 28N. 119E.                                   85

=Yun-nan=, China. 25N. 103E.                                  84

=Yun-yang=, China. 33N. 111E.                                 82

=Yuomi=, Lu-Chu Islands. 29N. 129E.                           89

=Yu-tsai-shan=, China. 35N. 114E.                             83

=Yuwasa=, Japan. 34N. 135E.                                   91

=Yu-yang=, China. 28N. 109E.                                  84

=Yuzgat=, Asia Minor. 40N. 35E.                               46


=Zafaranboli=, Asia Minor. 41N. 33E.                          46

=Zagros Mts.=, Turkey in Asia. 36N. 45E.                      47

=Zairat=, Punjab. 30N. 68E.                                   58

=Zaisang, Lake=, Asiatic Russia. 48N. 84E.                    94

=Zakhu=, Turkey in Asia. 37N. 43E.                            47

=Zamboanga=, Philippine Is. 7N. 122E.                         77

=Zamie River=, Burma. 16N. 98E.                               67

=Zanoah=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                12

=Zara=, Turkey in Asia. 40N. 38E.                             47

=Zarafshan River=, Turkestan. 40N. 67E.                       45

=Zarang Desert=, Persia. 35N. 52E.                            45

=Zarephath=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                             12

=Zayan Mountains=, Siberia. 52N. 96E.                         94

=Zebu Island=, Philippine Is. 11N. 124E.                      77

[*]=Zebulon=, Palestine. 33N. 35E.                            12

=Zeitun=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 37E.                           46

=Zeitun=, Turkey in Asia. 38N. 41E.                           47

=Zeya River=, Siberia. 50N. 127E.                             95

=Zhob=, Punjab. 31N. 69E.                                     58

=Zhob River=, Punjab. 32N. 70E.                               58

=Ziklag=, Palestine. 31N. 35E.                                12

[*]=Zileh=, Asia Minor. 40N. 36E.                             46

=Zinjan=, Persia. 37N. 48E.                                   47

=Zmeinogorsk=, Siberia. 52N. 82E.                             94

=Zobeir=, Turkey in Asia. 30N. 48E.                           47

=Zorah=, Palestine. 32N. 35E.                                 12

=Zulfiear=, Persia. 36N. 61E.                                 45


THE TEMPLE PRESS, PRINTERS, LETCHWORTH





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Literary and Historical Atlas of Asia, by 
J. G. Bartholomew

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITERARY, HISTORICAL ATLAS OF ASIA ***

***** This file should be named 40900-8.txt or 40900-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/9/0/40900/

Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.